           C64 PLA chip replacement using an EPROM and adapter
               latest updates and corrections  6-27-2018

EPROMS ARE NOT CREATED EQUAL AND NEITHER ARE C64 MOTHERBOARDS. READ THIS
NEW ARTICLE TO THE END FOR THE FINAL ANSWER REGARDING ANY PLA REPLACEMENT!

A special "THANK YOU" goes to Francois Leveille for his contributions
here! He now has a drop-in replacement for the C64 PLA: email him at
eslapion@videotron.ca for "PLAnkton". They are $15.50 US each plus shipping
and he uses PayPal for payment. He offers a 25% discount for 10 or more.

For those who still want to make their own replacement PLA with an EPROM, 
read on...

FIRST, SOME HISTORY...
     The supply of replacement ICs for Commodore computers has been
shrinking since Commodore stopped making chips a few decades agos. Most
of what you find now are used "pulls" from existing equipment, some 
good, some bad. The most common failure in the C64 has been IC U17, a 
pre-programmed 28 pin generic 82S100 programmable logic array or PLA.
That IC & the SID run very hot and should have been heat sinked. They
were in later versions of the 64. Since the supply of obsolete
un-programmed 82S100 ICs has likewise dried up, a way to replace the
Commodore PLA with some other kind of device has been discussed many 
times on the newsgroups and Commodore forums. Even the original PLA 
Commodore used over the years was not the same for all boards. That 
IC had to be tailored to match the increasing speed of other chips in 
later versions  of the C64, and Commodore started making their own MOS
chips with the 906114-01 number. They were slightly faster than the 
original 82S100 PLA chips and some boards needed to be "tailored" to 
correct the timing. Example: R42 and C204 on boards 250425 & 250466.
Note: the latest true C64C short board 250469 in the white case does 
not use the earlier PLA but a larger, more integrated IC. It runs cool 
and failures are rare. Only the earlier boards have the older PLA.
     Note that the early C64 board 326298 that has an original working 
PLA and an SX with a similar old PLA showed one strange symptom, namely 
an Epyx FASTLOAD cart would not work. Instead of a normal opening 
screen with FASTLOAD and a flashing cursor, only C64 and FASTLOAD were 
displayed on bootup. The cart would not load a disk directory nor would 
it load a program but trying just locked the computer. Replacing the 
old PLA with a newer one restored normal operation.

MAKING YOUR OWN PLA SUBSTITUTE WITH AN EPROM:

     A 64K EPROM programmed with code from a working PLA and rewired 
via a circuit board or other adapter to cross-connect a few pins has 
had some success in duplicating the logic of the original PLA. Note 
that the code for the EPROM must match the pinout of the adapter that 
goes with it! The modification I found back then took only a few pin 
swaps to make it work. One old 300nS 27512 UV EPROM worked in several 
boards with just a single capacitor on the /CASRAM line but it's not 
as easy as that! It may boot fine but other problems are not obvious.
     Making the substitute PLA is pretty straightforward. With a few
pins rewired via an adapter (schematic is readpla.jpg) I made with two
"sandwiched" IC sockets, I used my EPROM burner to copy the code from a
working PLA chip. The burner reads it as if it were a 27C512 EPROM and
the resulting file pla.bin has a checksum of hex DAA0. That code was
burned into a standard 27C512 EPROM. I then used another cross-wired
adapter (schematic is eprompla.jpg) to install the substitute PLA in my
C64.
     Testing a fabricated PLA substitute involved 1. observing the bytes
free on the opening screen to see if it's normal, 2. looking for
"glitches", random color shifts or odd characters anywhere on the screen
while a program is running, 3. testing with several different cartridges
such as Epyx FASTLOAD and CBM Jupiter Lander (which refused to load in
one board when everything else seemed to work), and a passing grade
using my C64 diagnostic cart. However, that's not good enough! Read on.
     With a "burner" on my PC, I began experimenting with various types
of EPROMs when my stock of PLA chips was depleted. The original PLA
averaged a rather speedy 50nS. The best information I had early on was
that a very fast IC was needed to simulate it. Most reprogrammable UV
EPROMs are much slower at 150 to 300nS and I already had some of those.
A one-time-programmable (OTP) Atmel AT27C512R45 seemed fast enough with
its 45nS response time and they were cheap at the time, so a batch of
the OTP chips was purchased and some adapters made out of "sandwiched"
IC sockets. The resulting replacement ICs do work in many C64 boards but
not in others, even ones with the same board number.
     One of my C64 boards (250407) booted with just about any PLA
substitute EPROM from the slowest 300nS to the fastest OTP but an
earlier board was -very- fussy about a sub-PLA. Results with those
boards varied from blank screen to less than the normal bytes free at
start-up to random character color errors or program crashes... common
indicators of a failing OEM PLA or bad RAM. The sub-PLA could be made to
work in some boards by replacing the VIC, the MPU and/or the CIAs. For
example, a CPU with a later code date worked in a board with a sub-PLA
whereas the earlier CPU chip wouldn't even boot up (blank screen). My 
oldest 64 board, a 1982 326298, gave me the most trouble. Most of the 
chips in it are early versions. Swapping some of them out with newer 
ones made that board work. I concluded that C64 ICs work within a narrow 
"window" of acceptable pulse timing, neither too fast nor too slow. The 
use of a substitute PLA in some boards obviously creates timing errors, 
some fatal (blank screen) and others producing subtle screen "glitches" 
and program crashes. I was later informed about problems that are not 
obvious with these tests alone.
     One early workaround I found was to add a small capacitor from
ground to the replacement IC output pin 18, the /CAS line to the RAM,
which adds a bit of delay to those pulses. Later C64 boards from the
factory did just that... used a resistor-capacitor combination (82 ohms
and 150pF) to create that delay as their new boards needed the 
compensation. One user found that an ST M27C512-90B6 EPROM was the best 
substitute using an EPROM only as a replacement PLA. I made up a bunch 
of those but soon ran out my stock. The problem now is that IC is no 
longer available! CAUTION: There were some counterfeit chips being sold 
on Ebay from UTSource that were actually re-stamped Winbond chips and 
they do not work without filtering! They may boot but are not true ST 
chips and produce the same problems as Atmel and other EPROMs.
     I used IC sockets to make my adapters but such a "module" that
plugs into a board mounted IC socket may cause intermittent operation if
the board socket has loose contacts, which they often do. A better way
is an adapter with round pins that are thicker than the standard
replacement types. Instead of sockets, I tried a 28 pin compression
"header" that is normally used with ribbon cable, and soldered the IC 
to it. Those 28 pin headers are available from Jameco Electronics as
#99670 and they make excellent adapters. Ready made PC board adapters
are also available from Jim Brain at Retro-Innovations. His board does
the cross-wiring so jumpers are not needed. Lastly, OTP EPROMs don't
need heat sinking like the original PLA should have been. EPROMs draw
less current and run cool. For example, the M27C512-90B6 used only 9mA,
whereas the original Commodore PLA needs 95mA (and runs very hot). 
Francois Leveille's PLAnkton runs cool at only 22mA. It's the -only- 
sub-PLA I recommend now. 

**************************************************************************

NOW, THE FINAL ANSWER...
     As stated earlier, the ST M27C512-90B6 had certain characteristics
that allowed its safe use as a C64 PLA substitute without any added
filter components but that IC is now NLA. The Atmel series of OTP EPROMs
(one time programmable) are still available and are a good choice for a
replacement PLA but it takes some effort to make them work reliably. The
best substitute seems to be the 45nS version (70nS also works) although
all EPROM based PLA replacements need "filtering" to make them work
properly and not cause damage to the computer or peripherals. If any
EPROM is used, the output lines MUST be filtered to prevent damage to
CMOS devices such as a JiffyDOS Kernal upgrade or external carts such as
the 1541Ultimate. This filtering takes the form of series resistors of
150 ohms on six of the EPROM output data lines.
     When an EPROM does the "calculations" needed as a sub PLA, it can
sometimes drive all outputs low at the same time for a fraction of a
second. Original NMOS chips in the computer may be tolerant of such
errors but newer CMOS will not be. The EPROM outputs must also have
small capacitors of 150pF to ground on the downstream side of those
resistors to provide high frequency filtering of the "spikes" or noise
pulses generated by the EPROM. That was not necessary with the original
PLA because it was a different kind of logic chip. With filtering, the
replacement PLA will work fine and is safe to use. I tested it on all my
boards from the earliest 326298 and 250407 (the most plentiful) as well
as the later 250425 and 250466. Note that those two later boards already
have an 82 ohm and 150pF components on their motherboards /CASRAM line
from the factory, so those parts are not used on the sub PLA module for
the 250425 and 250466. The EPROM IC pin 18 /CASRAM line is therefore
wired directly to the plug for those last two C64 boards only. The
/CHAROM line pin 15 is also wired direct to the plug in all sub PLA
modules as it needs no "correction". 

     Bottom line: EPROM PLA substitutes can be safely made to work but
that requires buffering of its data outputs so bus conflicts do not
cause damage or improper operation. It's a lot of work but some users
will want to "roll their own", and this seems the best way to do it.

Ray Carlsen

* readpla.jpg is a schematic of adapter to read original PLA code
* pla.bin is the code from an original PLA IC read in a burner
* filter adapter prototype.jpg is my first adapter with filters
* adapter with filters.jpg is a schematic of the new adapter
* header adapter.jpg is the header I now use to make adapters
* adapter assembly.jpg shows the assembly before soldering the IC
* finished.jpg shows the final assembly with SMD 180 ohm resistors

Addendum 11-7-2015
     I tried the Jens Schoenfeld SuperPLA V3 in two of my boards, namely
the 326298 and 250407 (the most common) and it's not fully compatible. 
The computers boot fine but disk access with an Epyx FASTLOAD cart is 
corrupted and freezes. In addition, the long PLA module will not fit on 
my 250407 board unless I remove the SID chip (also socketed). 

