									
Here are some instructions on how to operate this multifunction monitor.

Press in the top center of the trap door under the screen to open it and 
press in again to close it (it latches). With the door open, the inside 
preference controls from left to right are: BRIGHTNESS, CONTRAST, COLOR 
LEVEL, COLOR TINT, 3 POSITION MODE SELECTOR SWITCH, AND VOLUME. The 3 
screwdriver adjustments are for service only. There is an attached 
"pocket" on the right side of my monitor case which was there when I 
bought it. I presume it is just a storage pouch for a mouse. 
     The A/V cable I got with the monitor looks like an original Commodore 
but it's not. This apparently very common after-market one has four wires 
as opposed to the original CBM versions of two or three. Also, the color 
coding of the wires and connectors is different than a Commodore. Since 
the cable has a five pin DIN, it can't do separated Y/C, just composite.
To enable use of this kind of cable, You have to determine which ones
are composite and audio. The 3rd and 4th are luminance and audio in.
     One important difference about this cable is that it has an audio 
INPUT connection. No Commodore cable ever had this connection. It could
be used to input line level audio and pass it through the SID for audio
filtering. One important proviso when using the audio input connection:
NEVER connect or disconnect this wire with the computer running! I once
allowed the input plug wire to touch metal (ground) with the computer on
and it instantly destroyed the SID chip. To prevent accidental damage, I
put a piece of tape over that (yellow on my cable) connector. 
     A true Commodore cable has an 8 pin DIN on one end. The other end
has three normal outputs: Luminance (B/W information), chroma (color) and 
audio from the computer. I prefer S-video because it displays a sharper 
image on the screen. The three plugs color matches ones on the monitor.
     This monitor is also capable of monochrome operation via a single 
jack (bottom row of sockets) and produces a high resolution green screen. 
Set the preference switch inside the front panel to the right (MONO).

