
           TROUBLESHOOTING THE COMMODORE 1802 MONITOR 
            Latest updates and corrections  6-11-2011

This information is for technicians only...

     One very common problem with this monitor is a shorted deflection yoke. 
The yoke is the set of coils that sit on the neck of the CRT up against the 
bell of the tube. Normally a yoke rarely fails, but I've seen quite a few 
1802 monitors where the H sweep windings have corroded due to the glue the 
factory used becoming corrosive and "eating" the copper yoke wires. You 
can't see the damage until you pull the yoke and examine the windings. One 
other source of corrosion comes from the little black plastic wedges they 
used to stabilize and cushion the yoke on the bell of the tube. Without the 
wedges, the yoke would tilt (usually downward) and that misalignment affects 
the convergence at the edges of the screen. So, if you remove them for an 
exam, put them back in another spot (keeping the same yoke orientation) and 
reattach them to the tube with silicone rubber sealer (aka bathtub caulk). 
I like to use black electrical tape as an insulator between the wedges and
the yoke when they are re-installed. 
     The glue that causes problems in many older electronics devices is 
tan or light brown in color when new. As it ages, expecially when near a 
source of heat, it turns dark brown, then black. At that point, any copper
near or under it will be eaten away... copper board traces, component 
wires, anything. The reason is, when the glue fails like that, it becomes
hygroscopic (absorbs water out of the air) and that's what corrodes the 
copper. All such glue should be removed and the damage it caused repaired. 
I have included a few photos of how that glue appears and one of a yoke 
that was being repaired.
     If the yoke windings are arcing or shorted, the symptom will be a 
shrunken image on the screen or no picture at all. The yoke windings will 
get hot (small burned area... you might smell it) along with the H.O. 
Transistor running very hot. Don't run the monitor that way for more than 
a few minutes at a time or you'll burn out the transistor. 
     One quick test you can try to diagnose a shorted yoke is is to unplug 
it and see if the high voltage comes up without it. If you do power up the 
monitor with the yoke unplugged for test purposes, keep the brightness 
control all the way down, or better yet, remove the CRT board from the tube 
beforehand so you don't burn a spot on the tube face. Without horizontal or 
vertical sweep, a single very bright spot will appear on the tube face and 
that will burn it instantly and permanently! You only need to verify that 
the high voltage comes up with the yoke unplugged to know it's bad and 
loading down the H sweep and HV circuits. You will feel the static on the 
tube face with the back of your hand as soon as the monitor is powered up. 
     You might affect a repair of a shorted yoke (I've done it a few times) 
by removing it from the tube and carefully digging out the burned area, 
then isolate the bare wires from each other and splice them as needed.
Afterward, try it again. Once you verify the burned area is no longer 
arcing when the power is applied, the repair is done and the next step is
to temporarily install the yoke on the tube and see if the picture is 
normal again (no crossed wires in the repair). If OK, you can go ahead and
apply some silicon sealer to act as insulation and keep the area free of 
further corrosion. It's OK if some of those wires are folded around a bit, 
just so they don't touch each other or the tube when the yoke is put back 
on the tube. Before you remove the yoke, note the -exact- position of all 
the components on the tube neck. It's -very- important to get it all back 
on exactly the way it was. I routinely mark those components and the glass
neck with a felt tip pen beforehand. 
     If you have no picture and the H. O. transistor is getting hot, there 
are several possibilities besides the yoke. A downstream overload can be 
caused by a shorted diode. Check all the scan-derived voltage sources for 
a short. Find all the diodes running off the flyback (line output 
transformer) and measure their resistance from cathode to anode. If there 
is excessive loading downstream, i.e. something is loading it down such as 
a shorted Vertical output circuit, that circuit must be isolated and 
repaired.
      Check to see if there is sufficient drive to the horizontal output
transistor. Low drive will make it run hot because that will not allow
the transistor to saturate. That wastes power and creates heat. The H
driver collector should measure about 100VPP 15kHz square wave. Make
sure the solder connections to the H output transistor are good from the
driver transformer to the H output. Resolder all connections to make
sure. Any resistance in that circuit will reduce the drive. Of course, 
an oscilloscope is necessary to measure these circuit waveforms.
      If the overall condition of the monitor indicates it hasn't gotten
much use, I doubt the flyback is bad. Still, run it for five minutes if
it's safe to do so, then feel the flyback to see if it also gets warm
anywhere. It may take several minutes afterward for the temperature
change to migrate outward enough to feel. If a diode inside the fly is
shorted, that could do it. That kind of short usually produces a lot of
ringing instead of a nice 12uS pulse on the HO collector. Unplug the
anode cap and see if there is RF (AC) instead of HV DC with a HV
probe. You've seen the difference a high frequency AC arc makes that's
different from DC. AC on that anode lead indicates a bad diode inside 
the flyback.
     A frequent cause of "no color" can be an open resistor R255, a 
5.1K 1 Watt. It has a pretty hefty pulse on it and runs hot normally.
Use a two watt as a replacement. 
     

