									
        WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW IF YOU NEED YOUR CBM HARDWARE REPAIRED           
               latest updates or corrections 8-22-2016

  * MY QUALIFICATIONS AS A REPAIR TECHNICIAN
  * REPAIR ESTIMATES & MY REPAIR PROCEDURES
  * A NEW REPLACEMENT POWER SUPPLY FOR YOUR C128 OR c64
  * A RESET SWITCH FOR YOUR C64 (WARM AND COLD)
  * THE COMPUTER SAVER, A PROTECTION DEVICE FOR YOUR C64
  * JIFFYDOS, A COMPUTER ENHANCEMENT AND DRIVE SPEEDUP CHIPSET
  * DRIVE SELECT SWITCHES AND WRITE PROTECT BYPASS MODIFICATION

*************************************************************************

QUALIFICATIONS AS A REPAIR TECHNICIAN

     I've been a professional electronics repair tech all my adult life. I started 
back in the tube days fixing radios, TV's and many other consumer and industrial 
electronics devices. Most of the shops are gone now because modern electronics is 
not considered repairable. I'm one of the few techs left that still service 
electronic equipment but my services are now limited to Commodore only. 
     I began repairing Commodore gear and writing repair articles in 1986 when I 
bought my first C64 system. I joined several of the local Commodore clubs at that 
time. Since my retirement back in 2009, CBM 8 bit repair is all I do now and it is 
more of a hobby than a business. I've collected lots of C= hardware over the years 
that I now use for parts. I don't routinely sell hardware or parts, just service, 
but I do make exceptions at times. The cause of a failure might seem like a 
particular bad component but could be something else. If I sell an IC in hopes it 
might fix the problem and it doesn't, I'm out that part (which are hard to get) 
and the customer has lost money. That's a lose-lose situation I try to avoid. 
     I apparently have the only website dedicated to Commodore 8 bit hardware 
repair. If I can help you with simple problems, that's preferable to shipping it 
back and forth to have me do it. Email me at rcarlsen@tds.net and we can discuss 
the symptoms and possible solutions. Otherwise, I'll be happy to restore your 
hardware to factory condition. I also do upgrades and modifications. Before you 
send your equipment for repair, I suggest you read the instructions on my site 
regarding packing equipment for safe transport. I've seen too many items broken 
in transit due to improper packing or inadequate materials being used. I don't 
trust any shipper to pack goods properly... I do it myself! I use regular mail 
with tracking for most shipping unless requested to do otherwise. I add extra 
insurance if appropriate or if requested by the owner. Priority Mail costs more 
but packages don't always get there any quicker, and it doesn't offer any other 
benefits beyond $50 insurance unless you pay for extras. I might use UPS or FedEx 
for really expensive or one-of-a-kind items but I pack them myself and insure for 
more than they are worth to cover any possible loss or damage in transit, however 
unlikely. 

REPAIR ESTIMATES

     I can't know all the problems a computer or drive may have until I get it on 
the bench for tests, so exact estimates are impossible beforehand. Therefore, I 
usually "cap" repair charges for a C64, 1541, 1571, etc. at $50. Because the SX64 
is much more complex as well as more compact and harder to work on, I would cap 
that computer repair at $100. Obviously the repair cost for both versions of the 
C128 will be more because it's much more complex and therefore harder to diagnose. 
Figure a cap at $100 for those as well. With this in mind, the repair for these 
devices could be less but will be no more unless agreed upon beforehand. I charge 
no more than what the repair calls for and I'll let you know the final cost so you 
can decide if it's worth it to you. To be honest, I essentially have to fix all 
the problems with a computer to find out all that's wrong with it. That said, if 
you decide it's not worth it, I stop there and you owe nothing because I don't 
charge for estimates alone. 
     There are a few things that can push the cost higher. I check everything when 
I do a repair but I consider that a normal part of any work I do. You will not get 
your computer back with keys that don't work or some other fault even though the 
main problem is fixed. I've been on the receiving end of that kind of "service" 
before myself. Costs on any computer or disk drive would naturally go higher if 
special problems arise, if a drive has a bad head or I had to replace the computer 
SID (sound) chip, for example. Good SID chips are hard to find now and I've seen 
them priced at $30 and more. Bad heads in a disk drive mean the mechanism must be 
swapped out since replacement heads are not available except from another drive. 
     Another potential problem with the C64 is a computer severely damaged (many 
bad chips) by a failing power supply. Such damage makes that board uneconomical to 
repair, so I would just swap it out. Any device that has been tampered with by 
unqualified service persons may cost more to repair since I can't know what other 
problems may have been accidentally caused by such repair attempts. 
     I used to insist the user send their power supply along with the computer, but 
there is still the risk that it will fail in the future and damage the computer. 
For that reason, I now routinely install my computer Saver circuit for a minimal 
charge in all C64's so they are safe with any PS from then on. On all early version 
C64 boards, I also routinely install heat sinks on the chips that normally run hot 
to make them last longer. 
     Regardless of what the hardware needs during repairs, I will keep you informed 
about anything that might push the cost higher. No "surprises". Of course upgrades 
like JiffyDOS and modifications like a reset switch would add to the cost but I'm 
not pushing any of that on you. My website describes all the mods I can do, but you 
decide what you want. Upgrades or mods would cost less if part of a repair job but 
not much more if that's all you want done. 
     Before you send equipment for repair, let me know via email what the symptoms 
are and, if you're inclined, perhaps you can fix the equipment yourself. That's 
actually why my Commodore repair website was created. If the remedy is something 
simple such as cleaning the R/W head in a disk drive and the website doesn't tell 
you what you need, I'll be happy to talk you through it and perhaps save you the 
cost of shipping your hardware back and forth. 

REPLACEMENT POWER SUPPLY

     Since the original CBM power supplies for the C64 and "flat" C128 are dual 
voltage units and one source is 9 volts AC, there are no commercial off-the-shelf 
replacements made now. The world has moved on to +5VDC and +12VDC for electronic 
devices. A manufacturer would have to tool up for a limited market and that's not 
likely to happen. That's why I'm making a single universal replacement supply that 
can be used with any Commodore 64 or 128, even if they have a power hungry REU, 
RAMlink or carts connected. The components for a C64 power supply would cost almost 
as much as the universal (64 and 128) one I make, so rather than several different 
versions, I decided to fabricate one universal PS that meets the needs of all users. 
     The 9VAC 1 Amp part of my PS is just a small transformer; nothing unique about 
that except that the one I use can easily be wired to work in Europe and Australia 
where the line voltage is 220 volts instead of our 110 volts. Because there are 
many different types of power plugs used in other parts of the world, I install an 
IEC socket (same as on a printer or monitor) on my PS for the overseas user. They 
can then purchase an AC cord locally that fits their mains. 
     The 5 volt source is a prefabricated "switching" type rather than the linear 
design used in the "bricks". It has a 5 Amp capacity with automatic short-circuit 
and overload shutdown protection. As an added feature, I install my Computer Saver 
circuit in the supply even though a switcher is inherently more reliable to begin 
with. A single power cable out of the PS case connects to a C64 and C128 plug pair
in a Y configuration on the end of the cable. An adapter is used to power a Plus/4 
off of the C64 power plug. If desired, separate cables can be installed and more 
than one computer can be run at a time for an additional cost. Power for disk 
drives such as the 1581 or 1541-II can also be added to the same PS. 

A RESET SWITCH FOR THE C64: TWO TYPES, WARM AND COLD

     I can install a push button for a warm reset that will clear any BASIC program 
in memory and return the computer to its opening screen. However, a warm reset will 
not clear a ML program. The screen will freeze but you must turn the computer off 
and on again to completely clear it. To eliminate that, I can install a warm & cold 
reset circuit. It is implemented by use of a three-way center-off switch, normally 
placed on the lower left case side. Pushing the switch one way provides a warm reset 
and the other way a cold reset. The only drawback I've found to the cold reset is 
that an EPYX FastLoad cart may not work. All other carts I tried work fine and 
JiffyDOS is OK with it. Which reset modification you choose (or neither) will depend 
on how you normally use your C64. For example, if you use a freezer or other cart 
with reset already on it, you will not need that mod. If your usage requires many 
off/on cycles, a reset switch is handy and saves wear and tear on the power switch. 

THE COMPUTER SAVER: A PROTECTION DEVICE FOR THE C64

     A failing power supply such as the original Commodore black or white "brick" 
can do a lot of damage to a computer, making it uneconomical to repair. I hand-make 
small batches of what I call the Saver in three different versions. A Saver module 
can be installed in any C64, Plus/4 or late version VIC20CR to protect those 
computers from PS damage. That mod is normally done during repairs but could be 
installed at any time. Shipping back and forth for that upgrade alone would cost 
more than the mod itself but I install it routinely during all repair jobs. I also 
sell a completed module that the user can install in their own computer. Lastly, I 
make two external versions that plug between the computer and its PS. I don't have 
a regular sales outlet or use Ebay. I'm a repair tech (now Commodore-only after 
retirement) and do this mostly as a hobby. 

JIFFYDOS: A COMPUTER ENHANCEMENT AND DRIVE SPEED UPGRADE

     JiffyDOS is a chipset that, when installed in a C64, C128, VIC20 and other 
computers, allows many one-button commands such as: press F1 for a disk directory 
listing and F5 to load a ML program. An additional JD chip in a CBM disk drive will 
allow faster disk access. I can install JiffyDOS in your computer and/or drive in 
one of two ways. You can buy the chipset modules for your devices and send them to 
me with the hardware for installation or, with your Commodore hardware only in hand, 
I can program and install chips myself after I buy the codes from an authorized 
source such as Jim Brain. The final cost for you is about the same but if I program 
chips and install them, shipping is elimiated and turnaround time is less. 

DRIVE SELECT SWITCH INSTALLATION AND WRITE PROTECT BYPASS WITH SWITCH

     From the factory, a drive such as the 1541 is hardware wired as device 8. I 
can install a switch on your 1541 or equivalent disk drive or C128DCR to enable you 
to easily change the device number of the drive. Note that the 1541-II, 1571 and 
1581 disk drives already have device select switches on them. With an added switch, 
the 1541 or DCR drive can be changed 8/9 or 8/9/11 with a multiple position toggle 
switch. A four position slide switch (or two toggle switches) can be installed to 
select any device number from 8 through 11. 
     A switch and simple circuit installation in a disk drive will enable you to 
write to write-protected disks without notching them first or removing the WP tab. 
A switch on the front of the drive is recommended so that you can easily see the 
WP status (normal or bypassed) and not accidentally overwrite a valuable disk. 

Ray
