               ALL ABOUT THE COMMODORE POWER SUPPLY
            Latest updates and/or corrections 2-5-2014

     Why was the factory power supply (the black or white "brick" PS) for the C64 
designed the way it was and why does it have such a bad reputation? To begin with, 
a separate power supply for any electronic device means the powered device itself 
does not need to pass UL (Underwriters Laboratories) approval for safety. An 
external power supply isolates the computer or other product from the power line 
and possible shock or fire hazard so only the PS need be certified for safety. 
     Most low voltage and relatively low current power supplies built back in the 
1980's were of the analog or linear design, such as the popular "wall wart" you 
see everywhere. Older versions (like the C64 PS) use a step-down transformer to 
convert the AC line voltage to a lower voltage, rectify the AC (alternating 
current) to DC (direct current), filter it with electrolytic capacitors and 
regulate it to a precise voltage with a simple circuit (transistor or IC) to 
properly feed the device. Because it uses few components, the linear design is 
simple, relatively reliable and low in cost. The downsides of all linear power 
supplies: they generate quite a bit of waste heat because their design is not 
very efficient and the internal transformer is large and heavy. The more power 
(current in Amperes) they are required to supply, the larger and heavier they 
are and the more heat is generated by the regulator and other components. The 
use of a heat sink (a metal "fin" physically attached to the regulator) helps 
with heat dissipation, assuming the metal is exposed to the air. Note: not all 
small AC to DC supplies are regulated internally. With those, voltage regulation 
is done inside the powered device.
     Although the Commodore PS was designed with a current capacity of 1.5 Amps, 
it runs hot inside with a load of less than 1 Amp (C64 with cart plugged in) 
because it's a sealed-in-epoxy unit. This prevents user tampering and electric 
shock hazard but it holds the heat in and "cooks" those internal components 
eventually. It cannot be repaired if it fails and the heat cannot easily escape 
except through the epoxy case which is a relatively poor conductor of heat. All 
that said, look how long most of those power supplies have lasted. 
     There are several modes of failure for a linear PS. The electrolytic (filter) 
capacitors eventually dry out inside resulting in excessive "ripple", an AC 
component on what should be pure DC voltage. That often results in a lower than 
normal DC output which the computer cannot tolerate. It will fail to boot or run 
properly but will suffer no damage; it just doesn't work. If any PS component 
fails by opening up, the output voltage drops to zero, again without damage to 
the computer. The worst and most destructive PS failure is caused by a bad 
regulator that shorts out internally so its input voltage (more than 11 volts) is 
passed directly to its output! Most semiconductors (transistors and IC's) inside 
the computer run at 5 volts DC and can withstand a minor voltage overload without 
damage... but some cannot. The eight RAM chips in a C64 are especially vulnerable 
to over-voltage damage. Those IC's have an "absolute maximum rating" of 5.5 volts 
and are quickly destroyed above that maximum level. I've seen several CBM bricks 
that always worked normally when cold but would output excessive voltage when warm. 
Those supplies went on to damage several users computers because the owners didn't 
realize the fault was repeatable. Any PS brick failure means it must be replaced, 
preferably with something better if available.
     Why was the Commodore power supply and the C64 designed without a fuse in the 
5 volt line? There is one for the 9VAC source inside the computer and another in 
some power supplies, but none for the 5 volt source. Answer: The regulator IC 
inside the PS is designed to shut down (called foldback current limiting) if 
overloaded. The PS output voltage drops down to protect itself and the computer if 
the load exceeds 1.5 Amps. The problem with that is if the regulator itself shorts 
out, there is nothing to prevent damage to the computer chips from excessive voltage 
and nothing to limit the current when it happens... except a thermal fuse inside 
the supply transformer to cut off AC power to the supply. That thermal fuse opens 
when the transformer temperature exceeds a preset limit so it can't burn your house 
down if left on by accident. 
     If all you have is the Commodore brick, there are some things you can do to 
make it last longer. Since internal heating does eventually destroy it, keep it 
cool. Run it on the floor where cooler air can circulate around it. Don't put 
anything on or around it that would block the airflow. Don't try to use that PS to 
run power hungry devices such as a RAM expansion unit (REU) or carts like the 
1541Ultimate2. Lastly, consider a Computer Saver for your system. If your supply 
does fail, the Saver will prevent damage to your computer chips. 
     Commodore did later provide C64 power packs that didn't have epoxy inside and 
that did allow for air cooling of the regulator heat sink inside. Their cases were 
held together with screws which made those supplies repairable. They were more 
reliable but could still fail in a number of ways like the earlier bricks because 
their electrical design was the same.
     Some after-market linear supplies have a strange quirk of putting out a 
slightly higher voltage when the supply is unloaded (computer turned off). That 
made my Computer Saver device "trip" (fail-safe) when it wasn't supposed to. As 
it turned out, those supplies used thinner wires inside their power cable causing 
increased resistance and allowing for a drop in output voltage under load. To 
compensate, the designers added a resistor to the regulator to up its voltage a 
bit under the normal load of a computer. The final result was that the regulation 
from no load to full load changes by almost 0.3 volts. To compensate for that 
effect, my later Savers trip point was raised to 5.4 volts, still within safe 
limits for computer protection.
     A later Commodore PS was designed for use with their 17xx series RAM expansion 
units (REU). It is a switching type rather than the earlier linear design, and the 
5 Volt output can supply 2.5 Amps. Those supplies are rare and hard to find. 
Commodore realized at the time that although their standard brick PS had a rating 
of 1.5 Amps, it couldn't stand up under the added load of an REU. The same is true 
with after-market devices like the 1541Ultimate2. Some power supplies will shut 
down when that added load is put on an otherwise working power supply. So why 
should a PS rated at 1.5 Amps fail to work with a load of only 1 Amp or so? 
Answer: The start-up current draw is more than the running current and that makes 
the supply go into shutdown. Many devices draw more current when starting up than 
when running. Have you ever seen your lights dim when the refrigerator starts up 
or you run your power saw? The same startup surge is normal with electronic devices. 
     The C128 series computer power supplies and those of the 1571 disk drive are 
of the newer "switching" or digital types. Those supplies are generally smaller for 
the current they can supply and use more (but smaller) components to do the same 
job. Even so, they are inherently more reliable and generate less waste heat 
because their design is more efficient. Recent switcher designs are better than 
what was available back in the 1980's.

Important note: although it looks identical to a factory C128 PS and uses the same 
five pin square power connector, an Amiga power supply will not work with a C128 
because its output voltages are different! Feedback from users report that using 
an Amiga PS on their 128 results in almost normal operation but an annoying buzz 
or whistle in the audio output, most notibly in 128 mode. I don't have any reports 
of damage to the computer but I'm not ready to try it myself to find out. 

     Power supplies for the C128 and C64's are hard to find now and reliability is 
a major issue, especially for the C64 brick. Note that some users are modifying 
their C128 PS and adding a C64 power cable so it can run that computer as well. At 
least one vendor is making a 128 to 64 adapter that just plugs onto the 128 PS 
cable. Both the C64 and the C128 need a regulated +5VDC (at 1.5A and 4.5A 
respectively) as well as a 9VAC source at 1 Amp directly from a transformer. Due 
to that unusual dual-voltage requirement of those computers, an off-the-shelf 
commercial supply is not available. I understand some hobbyists are making their 
own out of "spare" parts. 

     If I were to start from scratch, I would want a 5 volt AC to DC switching PS 
module that could handle up to 5 Amps. That would be the basis of a universal PS 
good for any 8 bit Commodore computer that needed an external supply. The 5V 
switcher should be able to accept line voltage (120V for USA and 230V for Europe). 
It would have to maintain good regulation under all load conditions (including no 
load at all) and preferably shut down if overloaded without destroying itself or 
the load. That would eliminate the need for a fuse. It should be  efficient enough 
to be used in a sealed case without overheating. A separate transformer (120 or 
230V) would be needed to generate the 9 volts AC source for the computer. Lastly a 
case, power cables and connectors would be needed to complete the project. These 
components could all be purchased new for perhaps $50. As an alternative, the 
appropriate DIN plug could be installed directly onto the cables of two "wall 
warts" and then no case would be needed. It's not very eligant but would work as 
well. 

Ray Carlsen