
             ADDING A C64 POWER CONNECTOR TO A C128 POWER SUPPLY
                 latest updates and/or corrections 4-7-2013

     A C128 power supply puts out the same two voltages as a C64 supply. 
However, the 128 supply is more reliable and doesn't suffer the same bad 
reputation as the C64 "brick". It can handle higher current on the 5V 
line and will allow the 64 to run heavier loads such as a RAM Expansion 
Cart which normally comes with its own beefier power supply. Of course 
the C128 PS has a different type of connector which doesn't fit a C64. 
However, with the addition of a "pigtail" cable and connector, that 
supply can work with a C64. 

NOTE: It's important that you make the proper connections to the wires 
of your C128 supply. I've seen two alternate versions of that power 
supply, one with the same wire colors and one with them reversed! One 
way to identify the 9VAC source is that an ohm meter will read low 
resistance when measuring across the transformer winding. A way to tell 
the 5V source is that its wires will be heavier since that source can 
supply more current. 
     The most common C128 supply is made by Mitsumi, UL (Underwriters 
Laboratories) number 47K4 stamped on the case bottom and a Commodore 
part number of 310416-01. An alternate PS was made by Tokin, has a CBM 
part number of 316416-07 but uses the standard wire colors and UL 79K7. 
The one non-standard alternate PS I saw has -reversed- wire colors and 
was made in Taiwan, CBM part number 310416-01 and UL 94H8. I don't know
who made it but it has "DSP-128" stamped on the case.

     You can either cut the cable off a defective C64 PS or buy a four 
wire cable and DIN connector to do this modification. Wires must be 
insulated from each other to prevent shorts between wires. It's best to 
"stagger" or offset each of the four wires so, if the insulation breaks 
down, they still can't touch each other. View the photos to see how it's 
done. The color coding of the wires inside each cable will be different, 
so the correct ones need to be identified and connected together. Note 
that incorrect connections can damage the supply and/or the computer! 
Below is the most common colors used an both 64 and 128 supply wires, 
but be aware that each vendor of a power supply can use their own 
wiring color code!!!. 

Note: as an alternative to "pigtailing", you can cut or drill a hole in 
the PS case and connect a long C64 cord directly to the inside of the 
C128 PS. You will want to add some kind of strain relief so tugging on 
the added cable doesn't cause eventual wire breakage and/or short 
circuits. Don't cut the C128 cable off the supply even if it's not to
be used. It has a sense line inside that monitors the supply output. 
Whichever cable is not used, it's a good idea to cap the end so it 
doesn't accidentally touch metal and cause a short. 

                              STANDARD            ALTERNATE
SOURCE  C64 POWER CABLE   C128 POWER CABLE     C128 POWER CABLE

 + 5VDC     BROWN            RED                    BROWN
 - GROUND   BLUE             BLACK                  WHITE
 9VAC       BLACK            BROWN                  BLACK
 9VAC       BLACK            WHITE                  RED
 sense        NC             YELLOW                 YELLOW 
 GROUND       NC             GROUND BRAID           GROUND BRAID



Ray Carlsen
Carlsen Electronics

If you spot a mistake here, please let me know. Questions and comments
are always welcome. Thanks!