               EVEN FOR A TECH, THE JOB ISN'T ALWAYS EASY     10-1-2013
										
     Here are some case notes from an actual repair job. One C64 pulled off the 
shelf had an unknown history. It wouldn't boot (blank screen) and so was stored 
away for when I had time to dig into it. The only obvious problems it had were
a bad power switch (sometimes didn't do anything) and a blank screen at bootup.
     The board was a common 250407, one of the last of the full sized mobos. I 
replaced the switch and tried my DEAD TEST cart on it... nothing. I have a 
meter on my power supply to indicate how much current the board is drawing, but 
this one was within the normal range for a C64. I felt all the chips to see if
any were getting hot (shorted chips will often get very hot quickly). Again, 
no evidence of a problem there. The only socketed IC was the VIC, so I swapped 
it into a good board to verify it... no problem there. I always try the easy 
stuff first, even if the symptoms lead me elsewhere. 
     The next step was to narrow the search, so I thought of which IC's fail 
most often and I replaced the PLA. Flicking the power switch this time produced
a "garbage" screen... random characters all over. That usually indicates a RAM 
problem so I plugged in the DEAD TEST cart again, and this time it flashed 8 
times. I pulled the respective chip and installed a socket. Re-running the test 
with a replacement RAM produced another series of flashes, this time different. 
I did that until all eight RAM chips were replaced. Still, the cart flashed bad 
RAM! Powering up the computer without the cart would sometimes produce a garbage 
screen, so I checked the address and data lines but they all had pulses on them. 
What now? I made sure the PLA I replaced was indeed bad by testing it in another 
board. It was dead.
     I noticed the pattern of the "garbage" on the screen was not totally random 
but appeared as a series of horizontal bars of repeating characters. That pointed 
me to the two RAM interface chips U13 and U25. They were both bad! Replacing one 
gave me an opening screen but with less than 38911 bytes free, and the other swap 
gave me a normal opening screen. Now it was time to test the RAM chips I pulled 
to see if any were actually bad. Nope. They all worked fine when re-installed. 
So, the DEAD TEST cart is not exactly foolproof (and neither am I). As to why 
both RAM interface chips failed, I can only guess. They were both MOS 7708 chips 
and those Commodore MOS "copies" of standard TTL chips do seem to have a higher 
than normal failure rate. The standard TTL version is a 74LS257AN or 74LS257APC. 
Note that a 74LS257PC will not work. There is something about that version of the 
IC that just doesn't work correctly in a C64 or SX64. 
     So there you have it... another working board, but it took about three hours 
and ten sockets to get there, and eight were not necessary. Not all repair jobs 
are this convoluted but the "blank screen" symptom is always a challenge. When I 
encounter more than one bad IC, I always suspect a failing power supply, but in 
this case, multiple chip failures was just bad luck. If I had found several bad 
RAM chips, that does indeed point to a bad PS because those TTL IC's are 
particularly vulnerable to higher than normal supply voltage. The black brick C64 
supply can and does do that sometimes. That's why, when I take in a C64 for 
repair, I insist the user send in the PS as well. It -must- be load tested to 
make sure its normal regulated +5VDC output stays at 5 volts and doesn't creep 
up after it warms up!
     I should mention something else here... the very next dead C64 that I worked 
on was just as crazy. After replacing the bad PLA, I had a "garbage screen" that
was not a memory chip problem. It turned out to be one of the small logic chips 
(U27), a 74LS08. Again, the Commodore version of that IC (MOS7712) failed. I am 
now suspicious of all MOS replacements for small logic chips. 

For more info, see http://personalpages.tds.net/~rcarlsen/cbm/misc/diagcart/

Ray Carlsen
CARLSEN ELECTRONICS... a leader in trailing-edge technology

