 INTRODUCING THE SARUMAN-64 AND SARUMAN-128... A BETTER WAY TO REPLACE RAM   
                       updates and corrections 12-6-2020

     One of my least favorite jobs as a repair tech is extracting and replacing RAM chips in a C64, C128, SX64 and Plus/4. If the C64 or Plus/4 board has been damaged by a faulty power supply or the offending chips are the MT brand which are all known to be bad, I always replace all eight because experience has shown I'll see that computer again sooner or later to replace other RAM that might work fine now but will likely fail as well. 
     An original Commodore C64 or Plus/4 "brick" PS that fails via overvoltage on the 5 volt output can instantly cause one or more RAM chips to short out inside. Those IC's have an absolute maximum rating of 5.5 volts which makes them most vulnerable, and a failing brick can push nearly 12 volts down that line. RAM is the first to be damaged but there might be other failed chips as well.
     Over the years I've done my share of extracting chips, cleaning the holes and installing sockets for new RAM. It's hateful work which takes several hours to complete, and my cost for the parts alone is over $20. I had taken to swapping out some motherboards and relegating damaged "dead" boards to the shelf to use for parts simply because the standard repair is so time consuming. Also, I have an allergy to solder fumes which makes that work even more unpleasant for me.

     Enter the SaRuMan-64 and as of this writing the SaRuMan-128, small modules sold in Canada by Francois Leveille <eslapion@videotron.ca> that are designed to replace all RAM at one time. It's SRAM based and so draws less current than CMOS dynamic RAM chips. These modules can only be used on Commodore 8 bit computer motherboards C64, SX-64, Plus/4 and C128 to replace all existing RAM. They are -not- designed to upgrade earlier computers such as the VIC20, C16 or PET, nor the RAM in an REU. The new components run cool and should therefore outlive the computer. Note that a module for the C16 will be available soon.
     The SuRuMan-64 module is a "drop-in" replacement for the two 4464 RAM chips in later C64 250466 and 250469 motherboards. No jumpers or other modifications are needed for those boards but of course the original RAM chips must be removed first and the holes cleared to mount the new module. Sockets are not necessary but can be installed if desired. 
     With minor modifications, the SaRuMan-64 can be made to replace all eight RAM chips in all other C64 boards, the SX, and the Plus/4. The SaRuMan-128 module replaces all RAM in the C128. With the exception of the last two C64 boards with only two RAM chips, each C64 board version (326298, 250407, and 250425) has the same 8 chip complement in the same order but pin spacing is slightly different in each, so buying the modules without headers made them easier for me to install. I have also mounted the new module in a Plus/4 and an SX. There are photos of each install in their respective directories.

INSTALLATION ON EIGHT (or 16) RAM MOTHERBOARDS...

     Rather than trying to extract eight RAM chips intact, the easiest method is to snip all the pins close to the body of the IC's and use the pin stubs as mounting points for the new module. I prefer to extract the pin stubs and clean the holes for a neater install. The first SaRuMan-64 board I installed on C64 motherboard 250407 only took about 15 minutes to complete the upgrade from snipping out the old chips to wiring in the new board. This requires 21 solder points, 14 of which go directly down from the module to board chip locations (see photo) and the remaining seven connected with short jumper wires. 
     I'll use the 250407 as an example for the installation but it will be similar for other early C64 boards, the Plus/4 and SX computers since their general RAM chip layout is the same. As shown in the photo, the module is placed over IC locations U22 and U23 after all eight original RAM have been extracted or snipped out and the stubs removed. Headers of the new module directly connect all eight address lines, /CAS, /RAS/, /WE, two data lines and +5V VCC. The six remaining data lines to the module are then connected with short jumper wires to the other empty motherboard locations at pins 2 or 14 and the ground connection to the module connected to pin 16 of any of the empty motherboard locations. 
     If you get your SaRuMan-64 module with headers, some of them will have to be cut or broken off if you want to install the module in an 8-RAM C64, Plus/4, or SX CPU board. These include the two headers (2 pin and 3 pin) in the center of the module (flex back and forth to break them), two at the upper right side of the module and one at the upper left side (cut plastic, then break off the pins). See photo. Viewing the underside of the module, each data line is marked. Note: It's best to clear all of the holes under the module and mount it close to the motherboard (boards 250425 and later) so the metal shield can be put back. That shield is used in later boards as a heat sink for some of the chips, especially the VIC, PLA and SID. The VIC chip will overheat quickly without it! The exception is the latest 250469 short board which uses a different family of chips that don't get as hot in use. Still, replacing the shield is a good idea. 

INSTALLATION ON THE PLUS/4 MOTHERBOARD...

     The module is placed over IC locations U15 and U16 after all eight original RAM have been extracted or snipped out. Headers of the new board directly connect all eight address lines, /CAS, /RAS/, /WE, two data lines and +5V VCC. The six remaining data lines to the module are then connected with short jumper wires to the other empty motherboard locations at pins 2 or 14, and the ground connection to the module connected to pin 16 of any of the empty motherboard locations. Note that the eight data lines need not be in any specific order so those jumpers can be placed in a convenient arrangement. The photo shows all connections. The module must be mounted low enough so it clears the keyboard when the case is reassembled. That's why I ordered my modules without headers so I can use wires that allow the board to be lowered as needed before soldering. 

INSTALLATION ON THE SX CPU BOARD...

     The module is placed over IC locations UA5 and UA6 after all eight original RAM have been extracted or snipped out. Headers of the new board directly connect all eight address lines, /CAS, /RAS/, /WE, two data lines and +5V VCC. The six remaining data lines to the module are then connected with short jumper wires to the other empty motherboard locations at pins 2 or 14, and the ground connection to the module connected to pin 16 of any of the empty motherboard locations. Note that the eight data lines need not be in any specific order so those jumpers can be placed in a convenient arrangement. The photo shows all connections. 

INSTALLATION ON A "FLAT" C128 MOTHERBOARD

     For this installation, a single SaRuMan-128 module is used for both 64K banks of RAM. The module is placed over IC locations U51, U52 and U53 (clean those holes) after all sixteen original RAM have been extracted or snipped out. The new board directly connects all eight address lines, /CASRAM1, /RAS/, /WE, bank 1 data lines, +5V VCC and ground. The five remaining data lines to the module are then connected with short jumper wires to the other empty motherboard locations at pins 2 or 14. One additional jumper connects module CASRAM2 to IC board location U44 pin 15 as shown in the photo. 

Ray Carlsen