            A/V CABLES FOR COMMODORE COMPUTERS   5-17-2014 

     There are lots of cables out there and none of them are wired the
same as an original Commodore. CBM made two types. The earliest was a
two-wire used with the VIC20, with one plug each for video and audio. 
That cable will also work with all versions of the C64. Early C64 
boards and the VIC20 have a five pin DIN A/V socket, and later C64's 
and the C128 series use an 8 pin DIN. 
     The next Commodore cable type was a three-wire made for use only 
with the three rear inputs of a Commodore monitor (1702, 1084, etc.) 
because it separated the luminance (black and white signal) from the 
chroma (color information), which is similar to contemporary S-video. 
That cable has eight pins in the DIN plug to match the A/V socket of 
later C64's and the 128. That cable produces the best picture on a 
Commodore monitor. The three plugs of that cable will match, color 
wise, the three input jacks on the rear of the monitor. Make sure the 
switch is in the correct position to use those rear input jacks. 
     Later Commodore computers including the C128 still have a single 
composite output so any video monitor will work with the appropriate 
cable. Note: the Commodore three-wire cable will not work with a 
composite (single wire for video) monitor. The resulting video will be 
black and white only. 

FOUR WIRE CABLES AND COMMODORE COMPUTERS

     OK, now it gets complicated... there are lots of four wire cables
out there and none of them were original Commodore AFAIK. They all use 
a five pin DIN connector and the colors of the wires will -not- match 
the Commodore receptacles (yellow for video, etc.). There are even 
different color combinations with different four wire cables! These 
cables go all the way back to the 1960's. They were originally used in 
European audio systems. I first saw DIN connectors in Germany when I 
was in the Army in 1965. 
     If you have a four-wire cable, it will probably still work with 
your Commodore computer but you must find the plug combinations that 
matches your monitor. Of course the colors will not match. NOTE: one 
of those wires of the four wire cable will connect directly to the SID 
audio -input-. If that plug touches anything metal with the computer 
on, it can instantly destroy the SID (sound chip). Ask me how I know. 

FOUR WIRE CABLE CONNECTIONS WITH A COMMODORE MONITOR

    With the computer off and your Commodore monitor switched to its 
front inputs (use those, not the rear S-video), connect one of the four 
plugs to the video input of your monitor (yellow socket) and turn
the computer on. If the opening screen comes up, that's your video line.
If the picture has no color, that's video but it's not composite. When 
you locate the composite (full color), turn the computer off and try
the others to locate the audio output. If you turn up the volume, you 
should hear the normal whine of the SID chip. Once you've found the 
correct wires, tape up the unused plugs so they can't short to anything. 

ALTERNATE HOOKUP USING A FOUR WIRE CABLE WITH A COMMODORE MONITOR

     Although you should not use a four-wire cable with the rear jacks 
of a Commodore monitor, you can try to see if an alternate hookup will 
produce an acceptable picture. Switch the monitor to the rear inputs 
and turn the computer off. As above, test each of the cable plugs, one 
at a time (computer on only to make the test), to find the correct ones. 
Two of the four-wire plugs will produce a B/W picture but one of them 
will look cleaner on the screen. That's the wide band B/W output. 
Connect that one to the yellow input jack of the monitor and the other 
video output to the red (color) input jack. You should have a color 
picture if the connections are correct. The quality of the picture can 
vary depending on the monitor, specifically if it will accept composite 
video for its color input. If it looks good, connect the audio and 
you're done. Be sure to tape up the unused plug (SID audio input) for 
safety!

Ray


