                  REPLACING IC "CHIPS" IN COMMODORE EQUIPMENT    
                      updates and corrections 12-19-2012

     For the small "glue logic" chips such as the RAM in a C64, cutting the 
pins off is probably the best way to remove them. Replacements are cheap and 
you don't risk damage to the board. The new chip can be soldered onto the 
stubs left from the old one or, for a neater job, you can remove the old 
pins one at a time, clean the holes, then solder in the new chip or better 
yet, install a socket. Just make sure you clean the pins of a removed chip 
before you install it in a socket. If a blob of solder remains on a pin, it 
can damage the socket by forcing the contact areas too far apart. Another 
thing: NEVER solder a socket in place with a chip installed in it... any 
solder on the chip pins will adhere to the socket contacts, and you'll never 
get that IC out again!
     The bigger and harder-to-get proprietary CBM chips such as the PLA and 
SID in the C64 require a more cautious approach than casual snipping of pins. 
Unless you're CERTAIN the chip to be removed is bad, it makes sense to 
desolder it intact. After doing that much work on the board, I always install 
a socket. If you're careful how you remove it, the old IC should be OK. It's 
important to use the proper equipment for chip removal so you do not damage 
the board or chips. I used to use a vacuum type of desoldering iron, but 
they tend to clog easily thus requiring frequent cleaning unless you have one 
of the very expensive models that has an electric vacuum pump and a chamber
that holds the excess solder. Now I use a separate iron and solder sucker, 
one called a Edsyn SoldaPullt. MCM Electronics (www.mcminone.com) sells 
several equivalent types. I prefer the larger ones because of the higher 
vacuum they create. That type is easier to keep clean inside than the 
all-in-one vacuum desoldering iron.
PLAESE READ, THIS IS IMPORTANT!
     The PC boards in Commodore computers and drives are double sided (circuit 
traces on both sides) with plated-through holes. The main problem with removal 
of an IC is that the pins just barely fit the tiny holes in the board. Each 
hole must be cleared of solder and all pins -must- be free before you attempt 
to lift the chip out. Otherwise, the stuck pin(s) will break off and/or the 
board will be damaged. A careful visual examination of the board and each IC 
after removal is important. Unless you look closely, you may not even notice 
a PC board trace is broken. The device will not work when you put it back 
together, and you've just added a problem that's hidden -under- the new chip 
or socket! <shudder> That damage is VERY hard to find!
     The worst kind of board damage is destruction of the plated-through 
holes. If you ever see a copper colored blob on a chip pin after removal, 
that is the through-hole plating that has been torn off. That damage breaks
the circuit from top to bottom of the hole and it must be repaired. Most 
important is the connection at the top of the board... it will not be 
connected since the solder is done on the other side. The fix is easy. I 
use a single strand from a section of stranded hookup wire, poke it through
the hole and solder it on both sides. It may be necessary to scrape away 
some of the paint and coating to get down to bare copper. After that repair 
is done, install the socket but don't apply any more heat than necessary 
to that repaired hole or it will lift the repair you just did. 
     Removing a chip is a "black art". After all these years, I'm still 
learning and still make mistakes, especially if I've been at the bench for
several hours. Each IC pin needs to be heated for about two seconds, or until 
all the solder is molten on both sides of the board. Some have suggested using 
an additional iron on the opposite side of the board, but that obviously 
requires another set of hands... nice if you've got 'em. Before drawing the 
molten solder out, I move the tip of the iron slightly to press each pin 
closer to the center of the hole, then press the button on the vacuum plunger 
to draw the molten solder away. If all goes well, the pin will then move 
freely in the hole. If it's still stuck to the wall of the hole (it happens 
frequently) and all the solder is gone, I free it by grasping with tweezers
and wiggling it back and forth a few times, or by pressing sideways on the pin 
from the top of the board (inwards, towards the chip). If done properly, I can 
hear and feel it pop loose. If any solder remains in the hole, I add more 
fresh solder and try to desolder it again. The worst places to desolder are 
the larger areas of the board at the power and ground points, usually at the 
ends of the chips. Those large copper areas tend to quickly draw the heat away 
from the iron, so it's difficult to get them hot enough to get all the solder 
molten on both sides of the board. For the really stubborn ones, I use high 
quality Solder Wick and a larger soldering iron tip to desolder those pins. In 
any case, I try not to hold the iron on the board for more than a few seconds 
at a time. Too much heat will lift the pads (solder holes) and copper board 
traces. The tendency is to press the iron into the solder, but too much force 
will likewise do damage to the board. That's why it's wise to practice on an 
old surplus board first.
     Freeing up all the pins before extracting the chip is essential. I wiggle 
each one with tweezers to make sure it's free. It's sometimes helpful to push 
sideways on the top of a chip to force all the pins one way, then push the 
other way, back and forth a few times. You can hear pins clicking as they 
break free of the holes. When you're sure they are all loose, try prying up 
one end of the chip with a small screwdriver... gently! If any pins appear to 
be stuck, STOP. Free that pin and continue prying up one end, then the other.
     If you are successful in getting the chip out of the board intact, by all 
means install a good quality socket. That way, you will never have to touch 
that area again with a soldering iron again. It degrades it each time, so it's 
best to avoid resoldering if you can. After extraction of the old chip, 
examine the board on both sides with a strong light and a magnifier. Look for 
broken traces near the holes and solder splashes that may cause shorts between 
pins. Repair any damage and clean any holes that have enough solder left to 
prevent installing a socket. The easiest way to do that is to touch each hole 
with a clean iron for half a second each. That causes any solder in the holes
to mirgrate to the outer surface of the hole. As an alternative, you can poke 
a large pin in the hole (gently) and wiggle it around. Solder is soft and will 
be pushed out of the way. Hold the board up with a light behind it to see if 
all the holes are clear. If it looks OK, install the socket and solder each 
pin carefully. If you intend to reinstall a used chip you have previously 
removed, clean all the pins by squeezing each one with a small pair of flat 
needle nose pliers. Don't bend the pins any more than you have to. They will 
break if flexed too many times. Assuming the worst happens and you break a pin, 
if there is any stub left on the body of the IC, you can tack-solder a small 
wire to the stub and cut it off in line with the rest of the pins. It's not 
pretty, but it will work.

Ray Carlsen
CARLSEN ELECTRONICS... a leader in trailing-edge technology.
