
             ADDING A C64 POWER CONNECTOR TO A C128 POWER SUPPLY
                 latest updates and/or corrections 3-9-2013

     A C128 power supply puts out the same two voltages as a C64 supply. 
However, the 128 supply is more reliable and doesn't suffer the same bad 
reputation as the C64 "brick". It can handle higher current on the 5V 
line and will allow the 64 to run heavier loads such as a RAM Expansion 
Cart which normally comes with its own beefier power supply. Of course 
the C128 PS has a different type of connector which doesn't fit a C64, 
but with the addition of a "pigtail" cable and connector, that supply 
can work with a C64. 
     You can either cut the cable off a defective C64 PS or buy a four 
wire cable and DIN connector to do this modification. The color coding 
of the wires inside each cable will be different, so the correct ones 
need to be identified and connected together. Below is a common color 
code used an both supplies. Wires must be insulated from each other to 
prevent shorts between wires. It's best to "stagger" the four wires so 
if the insulation breaks down, they still can't touch each other. View 
the photos to see how it's done.

Note: as an alternative to "pigtailing", you can drill a hole in the PS 
case and wire a long cord directly to the inside of the C128 supply. 
You will want to add some kind of strain relief so tugging on the added 
cable doesn't cause eventual wire breakage and/or short circuits. 

     C64 POWER CABLE             C128 POWER CABLE

     BROWN  +5VDC                RED    +5VDC
     BLUE   - (GROUND)           BLACK  - (GROUND)
     BLACK  9VAC                 BROWN  9VAC
     BLACK  9VAC                 WHITE  9VAC
                                 SHIELD (GROUND BRAID)

Note: If your power supply cables use different colors for their wires, 
make sure you make the proper connections with them! One way to identify
the 9VAC source is that an ohm meter will read low resistance when 
measuring across that source (power off, of course). 

Ray Carlsen
Carlsen Electronics

If you spot a mistake here, please let me know. Questions and comments
are always welcome. Thanks!