          PROMENADE C1 PROFESSIONAL EPROM PROGRAMMER

                 For the COMMODORE 64 and 128 

          With PROMOS 2.0 Operating System Software

This manual and the PROMOS 2.0 software program are COPYRIGHT
(C) 1988 by J. W. Ranheim. All rights are reserved.
Neither this manual nor the PROMOS 2.0 program may be copied,
reproduced, transferred, transmitted, disclosed or reduced to
machine-readable form including magnetic or other storage
media, without the prior written consent of the copyright
owner, except that a reasonable number of archival copies of
the PROMOS 2.0 software program may be made by the purchaser
for his own exclusive personal use.
PROMENADE, PROMENADE C1, PROMOS, and PROMOS 2.0 are
trademarks of Jason-Ranhein Company.

                     LIMITED WARRANTY

JASON-RANHEIM COMPANY warrants to the ORIGINAL PURCHASER of
these products that they are free from defects in materials
and workmanship for a period of ninety (90) days from the
date of purchase. These Jason-Ranhein Company products are
sold 'AS IS' without express or implied warranty of any kind,
and Jason-Ranhein Company Is not liable for any losses or
damages of any kind resulting from the use of these products.
Jason- Ranheim Company agrees for a period of ninety (90) -
days to repair or replace, at its option, free of charge, any
Jason-Ranhein Company product, postage paid, with proof of
the date of purchase at its Factory Service Center.
This warranty is not applicable to normal wear and tear.
This warranty shall not be applicable and shall be void if
the defect In the Jason-Ranheim Company product has arisen
through abuse, unreasonable use, mistreatment or neglect.
This warranty is in lieu of all other express warranties and
no other representation or claims of any nature shall be
binding on or obligate Jason-Ranhein Company. Any implied
warranties applicable to these products including warranties
of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose are
limited to the ninety (90) day period described above. In no
event will Jason-Ranheim Company, its officers, employees,
agents, successors or assigns be liable for any special,
incidental, or consequential damage resulting from the
possession, use or malfunction of these Jason-Ranheim Company
products.

                    JASON-RANHEIM COMPANY
                      3105 Gayle Lane
                    Auburn, Calif. 95603
                     (916) 878-0785

