                                INTRODUCTION

            The acronym EPROM stands for Eraseable, Programmable,
      Read Only Memory. It refers to another of those electronic
      marvels that came out of INTEL Corp. in the mid Seventies. A
      memory chip that the user can program to contain any sort of
      digital information whatsoever. And even better, a chip that
      can be erased by simple exposure to ultra-violet light and
      reused many times. With these abilities, it is no wonder
      that EPROM's are produced in such tremendous quantities. The
      dollar volume is exceeded only by that of dynamic RAM'S.
           With the tremendous proliferation of types and sizes,
      programming an EPROM became a very complicated undertaking.
      Many EPROM programming devices were designed to handle just a
      single EPROM type; and those that could do more required
      setting a multitude of switches or plugging In a 'personality
      module'.  Some even required a voltmeter to set up.
      Programming an EPROM could easily take an entire afternoon.
      That unhappy situation suddenly changed with the introduction
      of the PROMENADE C1.
           By combining some sophisticated hardware with the power
      of an inexpensive personal computer, the PROMENADE makes the
      job almost trivial. And with new programming techniques, the
      PROMENADE cuts the time required to duplicate an EPROM from
      many minutes to just seconds. With all of its features and
      capabilities, the PROMENADE has set the standard for EPROM
      programmers all around the world. It has been widely
      imitated, even copied exactly; but its most important
      attribute has never been duplicated- VALUE.
           But even the best products can be improved, and with the
      introduction of PROMOS 2.0 the PROMENADE Is made even better.
      Simple, yet powerful commands for the manipulation of data In
      the computer and for moving that data to and from EPROM'S,
      disk drives and the like give performance and ease of use
      that have never before been achieved. Even better, these
      commands can be incorporated into BASIC programs that let the
      user customize his system to any EPROM programming
      application.
          The user is strongly urged to read this manual carefully
      and to thoroughly familiarize himself with the material. An
      hour or two spent this way will be repaid many times over.

                                           JASON-RANHEIM COMPANY
                                           Auburn, California
                                           November, 1988

                                     -1-
