
          REPAIRS TO THE MSD SD-1 (SINGLE) AND SD-2 (DUAL) DISK DRIVE
                  Latest updates and corrections: 5-22-2020

   I NO LONGER SERVICE THESE DRIVES. AFTER SPENDING DAYS ON SOME, I COULDN'T 
   FIND ALL THE FAULTS AND HAD TO GIVE UP. THAT HAS HAPPENED TOO MANY TIMES!

     This article describes what needs to be done to all MSD SD-1 and SD-2 disk 
drives to keep them working. It has to do with the mechanical drives PC boards, 
the ones mounted on the top and bottom of the mechanisms. Before I describe
those problems, let me first mention a few recurrent faults I've encountered on 
that side-mounted MSD controller board: 
 1. The IC sockets for the DOS ROMs seem to be of poor quality. Reseating the 
chips (remove, scrape the IC pins, reinstall) in those sockets was necessary to 
restore normal operation in a few drives I worked on. In one case, electrical 
contacts in those sockets were so loose, the IC's fell out of them in transit. 
For any repeat problems with sockets, it's best to just replace them both. 
 2. The connections from the power transformer to the main PC board sometimes go 
intermittent. If your drive fails, especially if it's intermittent, extract the
transformer plug and socket, and solder the wires directly to the board for a 
permanent fix. 
 3. The metal shield cup under the head often falls loose and blocks the head
from moving forward. Read the last segment for that repair. 

DRIVE MECHANISM PROBLEMS (TEC FB-501)

     First of all, the mechanisms used in the MSD series are unique. Most 360K 
"generic" replacement drives such as old IBM types do not work. I found a few 
Panasonic mechanisms that did work with a few modifications in an SD-1, but none 
that ever worked in an SD-2. That makes it necessary to repair the original TEC 
mechanisms.
     As old as they are, whether they have been used or not, this series of MSD 
disk drives have or will have -all- developed a unique fault. There are two PC 
boards on the drive mechanisms. The top one is the disk controller board and the 
one on the bottom is the spindle motor drive board. Between them, these boards 
have over a dozen small electrolytic capacitors that must -all- be replaced. 
When these old caps leak their electrolyte, that corrosive substance eats away 
at the copper board traces as well as nearby components. The damage is sometimes 
hard to see but corrosion in the area around the caps is noticeable if you look 
carefully. Symptoms may range from sudden inability to read or write to complete 
failure of the mechanism which is indicated by 7 blinks of the LED's on power up. 
Even if the drive is working perfectly now, those mechanisms are all affected 
and must be reworked before damage to the board makes repairs more difficult or
impossible later. 
     To effect a complete repair, all of the electrolytic capacitors must be 
removed, the board cleaned of all electrolyte residue and corrosion, and all the 
caps replaced. In many instances, the residue has gone under components such as 
IC's, so those chips and other board components must be removed and board repairs 
done underneath them before they are re-installed or replaced. The electrolyte 
tends to creep along copper board traces, so some damage can appear inches away 
from the bad capacitors! 
     The replacement caps will likely be taller than the original unless special 
"low profile" caps are used. The taller caps can be used if they are installed 
folded down so they don't stick out too far when the mechanism is re-installed in 
the drive. For the spindle motor board, the caps must be oriented so they don't 
touch or block anything during board installation back in the mechanism. Note 
what might be in the way as the board is re-installed before you decide on the 
orientation of those caps.
     Much of the damage to board traces (the printed copper foil circuitry) is 
hidden underneath the factory paint over the traces. This paint must be carefully 
scraped off to expose the copper. Anywhere the paint is darkened has probably 
suffered damage and the entire area must be carefully cleaned and examined under 
strong light so that all breaks in the foil are located and repaired. After 
scraping, I use an old typewriter eraser (remember typewriters?) to "polish" the 
copper so it shines which makes breaks easier to see and makes soldering easier. 
I use Isopropyl Alcohol or Acetone (which seems to work better) to clean up the 
cap residue. I use needles on the ends of my ohm meter leads to poke into the 
copper traces at each end to make sure there are no open circuits along their 
paths. Some open circuits are hard to see but the meter will find them. 
     Although conductive paint (used for car rear window defogger repairs) should 
work to fix the open traces, I prefer to use solid copper wire for this type of 
repair because some connections go through the board from top to bottom and 
conductive paint will not work if that connection is broken. If wire is used, it 
must necessarily be very thin. I use one strand out of a piece of stranded hookup 
wire. For example, when an IC is removed to repair the damage underneath and I see 
that the copper trace at the hole is eaten away, I poke the wire through the hole 
and solder it to good copper on both sides of the board to effect a permanent 
repair. I then seal the board with clear nail polish over all the affected areas. 
That prevents any future damage to the exposed copper. When the polish dries, I 
reinstall all components and sockets for the IC's. It's important to solder 
quickly to secure the IC (socket) pins and avoid unsoldering the repair wires. 
Note that some areas of the board will be corroded and soldering is impossible.
     I am including some before-and-after photos of these repairs. Included are 
pictorial diagrams of the boards showing the location of the capacitors and their 
polarity. Note that there are three different versions of the spindle motor PC 
board. These have different cap numbers and board locations. In one version, 
three of the caps are special non-polarized types. It's important they be replaced 
with the same type (also called bi-polar) electrolytics.
     As of this writing, I have repaired about a dozen MSD drives. In almost every 
case, the drive didn't work after the first rework. I had to go back repeatedly to 
repair open traces that I missed the first time around. One fault produced an error 
that showed up as no BAM update when a disk was changed. Another drive would read 
but not write. Some foil breaks are impossible to find because the opens are under 
components so the trace can't be followed by hand. Extracting components subjects
the board to further possible damage which must be repaired. For traces that can't 
be visualized and repaired, board jumper wires might have to be used. Much like a
cancer, it's a frustrating problem that may take many tries to cure completely. 
If you do manage to clean all the residue and fix the boards, it's still possible 
you'll have problems later since the corrosion will continue unless all is found
and removed. This is the most disgusting work I've ever done. It's far from a
normal repair since the faults are not "logical" as a component failure would be.
Age, shaky hands and reduced eyesight make it too difficult for me to continue. 
     I should add one more thing I've discovered. There is a metal shield just
under the head and it often loosens and falls free, blocking the assembly from
moving forward. Rather than taking the drive all apart, pull the shield forward
and put some contact cement inside, then press it back into place under the head.
Before it sets up, make sure the head will go all the way forward to the stop. If
not, slide the head back, push the shield up from underneath and try it again. 
It should stay in place by itself but it might be a good idea to let it dry with
the drive upside down and the head assembly moved all the way forward. There should
be no restriction... no scraping of the shield when the head assembly is moved. 

Ray Carlsen