     Small heavy objects such as a 1541 disk drive or SX computer require special treatment when it comes to packing them up for shipping. Here are a few tips to prevent damage to your equipment when you decide to ship something for repairs or if you're moving. I'll use the 1541 as an example, but the same ideas work for most equipment. Foam chips or plastic "popcorn" can be used for cushioning -only- if you put those chips in sealed bags to keep them from migrating around inside the package. A heavy object packed in nothing but foam chips will sink to the bottom of the box and will likely suffer case damage if the container is dropped. Crushed newspaper is almost useless for protecting heavy objects. If unprotected, your drive will almost certainly arrive with a broken case. Several layers of bubble wrap is very good for protecting a C64 or 128, with some exceptions. Keyboards are especially vulnerable and need protection. I prefer to double-box a computer (box within a box) to fully protect it. Surround an SX in the inner box with thick foam. Put cardboard or something between the handle and the SX case to keep it from being scuffed from vibration in transit. 
     I always tell people to pack equipment well enough to survive a six
foot drop onto concrete. No kidding! Foam padding (the kind that deforms and springs back when you release it) is a good lightweight cushion for all types of equipment, especially for a heavy object like an SX-64 computer. Don't be tempted to reuse old Styrofoam blocks that were originally used as packing material for a TV set, DVD player or other equipment. Those blocks are form fitted to the device they  protected and are worse than useless for your gear. The best way I have found to pack easily breakable items is in a box within a box, and with padding in both. The external box may be crumpled but the internal box will survive, as will its contents. Plastic "bubble wrap" is a good protective packing material, but don't depend on it alone for heavy objects. It works best as the first line of protection for such light things as keyboards and circuit boards. 
     Shipping companies charge for the weight and the size of a container. Lots of cardboard inside the box can add quite a bit of unnecessary weight and may not protect equipment the way you expect. I use cardboard sheets to separate one heavy device from another (a C64 from its PS, for example), if shipping more than one unit, for reinforcing the container itself, and for covering a small heavy object such as a disk drive to protect its fragile case. Whatever you use, make sure the contents do not "rattle" when the final package is shaken. Looseness means the device inside can move around in the
packing material and could suffer damage in transit from vibration or
sudden drops. 