                        COMMODORE KEYBOARDS           
  Troubleshooting and maintenance of C64 and C128 (including C128DCR) 
               Latest updates and/or corrections: 11-17-2015

     Sooner or later with use, computer keyboards show their age. The most
common first sign of a problem: some frequently used keys require more
force to make them work, or they don't work at all. The Shift keys,
Spacebar, and commonly used letters such as E and A are the first to show
symptoms. To anyone who is proficient at the keyboard, it quickly becomes
intolerable to have to stop and restrike a key that didn't work the first
time. The most common way to overcome the problem, at least temporarily,
is to strike the keys with more force. Very soon after, even that becomes
useless... the keys do not respond no matter how much force is used, and
the keyboard needs to be repaired. Other keyboard problems take a bit of
detective work to diagnose and solve. 
     The design of a Commodore keyboard is simple and elegant. It works
well and lasts a long time. When keys do become unresponsive, it can be
from several causes. If only one or two are not working (or require a lot
of force to make them work), it's usually because those internal keypads
are worn or dirty. Sometimes dirt can work it's way into the internals of
a keyboard. A bit of dirt, hair or <ooops> a liquid spill can render the
key(s) inoperative if such debris gets between the conductive rubber
keypad and the underlying PC board. If many keys are not working (a whole
row, for example), the cause is normally either a failing CIA (keyboard
interface) chip in the computer, or a bad connection between the keyboard
and the motherboard. No problem with the keyboard itself will prevent the 
computer from displaying the startup screen, by the way. The keyboard can 
even be unplugged from the motherboard for diagnostic purposes, and the
computer will still display the opening screen. 
     Electronically, pressing a key connects a matrix "row" (one of eight)
with a "column" (one of eight) and provides "keyscan" data input to a chip
called a CIA (Complex Interface Array). The coded 8 bit data output of
that chip tells the microprocessor which key was pressed. Some of those
keyboard data lines are "shared" with the joystick inputs. One key that
doesn't go to the CIA is the RESTORE key. It simply grounds an input line
to a timer chip. Two more inputs in a C128: the 40/80 switch, and the Caps
Lock switch are likewise not part of the rows/columns inputs. 

IF YOU MUST PRESS HARD TO MAKE KEYS WORK

     Fortunately, most keyboard problems are of the "I have to step on
this key to make it work" variety. Commodore keyboards are easy to pull
apart and clean. That is sometimes all that's needed to make them work
again. At worst, the little rubber keypads deteriorate and must be
replaced, either with new ones or swapped with ones from seldom used keys.
The pads are attached to "plungers" under each keytop... normally the
plunger (with keypad attached) is swapped out as a unit, but you could
remove just the rubber pad... it comes off the plunger easily. Very worn 
pads will look "shiny". If failing because they have been used a lot,
unresponsive key pads don't benefit much (if at all) from cleaning... 
they must be replaced.

CLEANING THE c64 KEYBOARD

 Cleaning the keypads and PC board will correct non-functioning keys
-if the problem is dirt or other debris-. After removing the board 
(lots of tiny screws and one soldered switch) from the keyboard top, 
wipe the dust off the PC board with a clean cloth, if necessary. Don't 
rub or scratch the conductive spots on the board. They normally have a 
coating to prevent corrosion and oxidation of the copper underneath. 
If there is some corrosion that you must remove from a -copper- clad 
board, rub the spots -gently- with a pencil eraser, then clean the 
board with alcohol and wipe dry. Clean fingerprints from the board 
contact areas. Oil and moisture from your skin can cause problems. 
The contact areas should be shiny copper.

NOTE: some boards (the SX for one) have black conductive paint over the 
contact areas rather than copper. Unless you encounter a liquid spill 
that needs to be cleaned off, it's best to leave those areas absolutely 
alone. If the black conductive coating is rubbed off, the board will 
become unserviceable!!!

Blow any dust out with compressed air or vacuum, and remove any hair or 
fibers left behind from the Q-tip or cloth. The first and least invasive 
restoration attempt of the conductive rubber pads should be done by 
pulling a clean strip of paper across each one. The rubber pads are thin 
and flexible, so be careful you don't tear or dislodge them. With one 
hand, use a finger to hold each key down and press the paper gently 
against the pad with your thumb while pulling the paper across the pad 
with the other hand. You'll have to do one side of the board (two or 
three rows of keys) and then turn the board around and do the other rows. 
Don't touch the keypads with your fingers, but if you do accidentally, 
make sure you clean off the oil with alcohol or other solvent before 
reassembly. Never use abrasives on the board or keypads in an effort to 
clean them. It only makes matters worse and may render the entire board 
unserviceable. If contaminated from a spill, the rubber keypads can be 
cleaned with alcohol on a Q-tip. It's best not to spray anything inside 
the keyboard. The spray goes everywhere and just attracts dirt.

CLEANING VS REPLACEMENT

     I did some experiments with good and bad keypads. I tried various
kinds of cleaners including solvents, and rubbing with paper and emory
cloth. After all this, I have come to the conclusion that for a key worn
out by normal use, cleaning is useless. The conductive rubber itself
deterioriates and cannot be "rejuvinated". A new key will measure less
than 1000 ohms (1K ohm) across the two ends of the rubber keypad. If used
a lot and starting to fail, it will measure more than 10K ohms. At that
point, the user will notice that it takes a lot of force to make that key
work. Nothing I tried would make a bad key better (unless the problem was
dirt or contamination of the PC board), and interestingly enough, nothing
I could do (including sandpaper and solvents) would increase the
electrical conductivity (and therefore the pressure needed for proper key
response by the user) of a good key. The good ones stayed good and the bad
ones stayed bad, no matter what I did. So, with that in mind, if cleaning
doesn't help (or you don't want to have to open the box again), just
replace failing keypads or the entire plunger with pad attached.

REPLACEMENT OF KEYPADS

     The quickest way to repair a keyboard if you have no spare parts on
hand is to swap heavily used keys for ones not often used. The Shift keys,
Spacebar, and letter keys like E and A for example, represent ones most 
used by the average user. Such keys as the Up Arrow, Back Arrow and pound
key could be used as a "source of parts" for a quick keyswap. If you have
an old C64 or VIC20 laying around, it could be used as a parts source for 
another similar computer. Many parts are interchangeable between computers 
and all keys are the same inside. To make sure you have a good one to 
install, either measure it with an ohmmeter across the two protrusions of
the pad, or just examine it closely. Worn pads will look shiny... good
ones will have a dull looking surface. New pads will measure between 100
and 1000 ohms (1K ohms). When they start to require more pressure to make
them work, the resistance of the pad will be up around 10K ohms or more. 
If the resistance is too high, the computer does not sense a keypress.

STUCK KEY SYMPTOMS

     A stuck key can produce some rather confusing symptoms, depending on
which key is stuck down. If the keyboard has ever suffered a liquid spill,
one or more keys can get "sticky" from days to months later. Of course a
broken key can stick down as can one with a missing spring under the 
keytop. You can see it if you examine the keyboard as it will be lower 
than the other keys. If one letter appears on the command line of the 
startup screen with a flashing cursor after it, or it starts printing a 
letter repeatedly on the screen at startup, suspect that key of being stuck 
down. If the key feels OK, there might be some debris on the underlying PC 
board that simulates a key being held down (shorted contact on the PC board. 
Unplug any mice or joystick(s) if used and try it again. If suddenly none 
(or only a few) of the keys work, check to see that none are stuck. Press 
each one and see if the "feel" of the key is right. A sticky one will not 
come back up like the others. A missing spring under a keytop can produce 
intermittant or "stuck key" symptoms. That's usually easy to spot just by 
looking. Beyond that, stuck keys or whole rows or columns that don't 
respond may be due to a failed CIA interface chip in the computer. If 
unplugging the keyboard doesn't resolve a "stuck key" symptom, that's 
another indication of a failing CIA.

REMOVAL OF KEYTOPS

     Removal of the keytops must be done with great care so as not to
damage the top or break the plunger underneath. The tops are a press fit 
onto the plungers that stick up through the plastic housing. A spring under 
each top makes the key come back up when not pressed. You might be tempted
to use a knife or screwdriver to remove a keytop, but that's not a good 
idea. The top must be pulled -straight- up and off. If you twist or bend 
it to one side, you may break the plunger, keytop shaft or both. Prying 
against another key will likely mar or scratch it. 
     You can make a simple tool that will pop those keytops off easily. 
Here's how to do it: With a pair of tin snips or metal shears cut a strip 
of metal from a tin can (I used the top cut out of a dog food can) about 
2 1/2 to 3" long and about 1/2" wide. Bend the ends over at a right angle 
with pliers to form a tiny lip (1/32" or less) at each end of the strip. 
Bend the strip into a U shape that fits over the keytop. The tool should 
be big enough so your finger will fit inside over the keytop. 

               ________
             /          \
            |            |
            |            |
            |            |
            |            |
            |            | 
            |            |
            |            |
            |_          _|              

The lip at each end must be small enough so the tool will fit between
keys, but large enough to grab the underside of the keytop. Note: the 
cut ends of the tin strip are very sharp! Wrap tape around the strip if
necessary for protection. Now, press the tool over the keytop and,
squeezing the sides gently to hold it in place, pull up on the tool and
the keytop will come off easily. When it pops off, don't lose the spring
underneath. Don't remove more than a few tops at a time unless you know
where they go back. It's easy to get confused with keys that are not often
used. (Ask me how I know.) It's best to have the PC board in place (held
by a few screws, if necessary) so the plungers don't fall out when the 
keytops are removed. Plungers are removed from the bottom of the assembly.
     If you have a broken keytop and no spare parts handy, the shaft can
be glued back on with SuperGlue, but first you have to extract the broken 
stub from the plunger. Don't be tempted to just glue it back without 
removing the broken stub from the plunger! If you do, you'll never get 
that keytop off again, ever. Also, that glue tends to wick its way into
other areas. So, you'll probably end up with a key that's stuck forever. 
Make the extra effort and extract the broken stub of the keytop shaft out 
of the plunger, I use a paperclip with one end bent into an L shape small 
enough to fit into the small hole in the shaft. Insert the tool into the 
hole and pull it out quickly. It may take several tries, but that trick 
usually works and doesn't damage anything. Now, orient the broken shaft 
bit over the bottom of the keytop so it sits straight. Note the position 
and prepare to glue it back on. To reinforce the mend, trim a wooden 
toothpick or the wooden shaft of a Q-tip to tightly fit the tiny hole in 
the shaft and the broken stub. Force it into the bottom of the keytop 
and then the broken shaft down over it until it fits snug. When you are
satisfied it sits straight and is a good tight fit, remove the stub from 
the stick and apply the glue, then press the stub back over the stick. 
Immediately wipe away any excess of glue that is pressed out with a Q-tip. 
Let the repair set at least an hour before you try to use it. Trim off 
any wood sticking out of the hole if necessary. The repaired keytop 
should now work when pressed into place.  
     A broken plunger (actually more common) is not usually repairable. 
If it's cracked along the side and the keytop will not stay on, no 
repair I've ever tried was reliable... it would break again or the mend 
was "sticky" in the hole. 

DISASSEMBLY / REASSEMBLY... C64 Computer

     Remove three philips screws along the underside of the front edge of
the computer. Lift up the top half-shell and unplug the keyboard and power
indicator connectors. The keyboard connector may be hard to remove. Grasp
the ends and gently rock it back and forth slightly while pulling straight
up on it. Don't pull on the wires! Note that there is a blank pin on one
end. That makes it difficult (but not impossible) to put the plug in
backwards. The power LED connector will go either way... it doesn't
matter, because it will work either way. The top half-shell can then be
removed from the lower half. The rear fasteners are sometimes very tight
and will "pop" when the top is folded back. That's normal. 
     Rest the top (keyboard) face down on a cloth or cushion to keep from
scratching the keys. Unsolder the ShiftLock switch wires: heat the
connection and just pull the wire out quickly when the solder melts.
Remove 23 tiny philips screws holding the PC board to the keyboard
assembly. The assembly need not be removed from the cabinet top, by the
way. Lift the PC board up and out. Examine it for dirt or liquid spill
residue, and inspect the rubber keypads for contamination or wear. Clean
or replace pads as necessary. To remove a keypad, the keytop must be
removed. (See REMOVAL OF KEYTOPS). With the keytop removed, the spring and
plunger (with rubber keypad attached) will fall out. Make sure you don't
lose anything! The plunger should slide out from underneath easily. If it
doesn't, look for residue or cracks in the plastic. If it's broken or worn
out, the plunger/keypad must be replaced. A plunger will fit in any
slot... they are all the same. When installing a new plunger, don't forget
the spring under the keytop. Temporarily install the PC board when you're
ready to press the keytop back on. It gives the plunger something to push
against, since you must apply pressure to the keytop to get it to "snap" 
back on. Don't use your finger to hold the keypad... oil from your fingers
will contaminate the pad. 
     When you're finished cleaning/repairing the assembly, reinstall the
PC board and put the tiny screws back in. Don't forget to resolder the
wires to the ShiftLock switch: heat the connection and poke the wire in
when the solder melts. Plug the keyboard back into the motherboard, and
plug the LED connector back in. Lay the back of the two half-shells
together and fold the top back down. It helps to squeeze the cabinet
together at the rear to seat the fasteners. Put the three screws back in
the cabinet and you're done. 

DISASSEMBLY / REASSEMBLY... C128 Computer

     The procedure is very similar to the C64, but the C128 has three 
keyswitches to unsolder. These switches are plastic and can melt from 
too much heat on their terminals... desolder them quickly!
     On the "flat" 128: remove six screws (standard philips or Torx) from
the bottom of the 128 case. Note: the 128 may have special screws holding
the cabinet together. The newer star-shaped type is call Torx. The screws
require a special T-10 size driver to remove them, but a small flat blade
screwdriver can be used if you're careful... just make sure it fits
tightly in the screwhead. Lift the top half-shell, starting at the front
edges. Two small plastic "snaps" hold the case together on each side, and
so may make it difficult until you press in slightly on both sides near
the top row of keys on each side to pop it open. With the top shell loose,
lift up on the left side of the top shell, reach under and remove the
power LED plug from the motherboard. Now grasp the top half with both
hands and shift it to the left to expose the wiring (still connected)
between the top and bottom shells. You need to remove the keyboard
connnector and a small philips screw. The keyboard plug is usually very
difficult to remove. Because it is recessed, you can't get enough of a
grip on it to remove it with your fingers. Instead, grasp -all- of the
wires tightly between thumb and forefinger as close to the plug as you
can and pull up, gently rocking back and forth to loosen the plug from
the socket. Next, disconnect the ground strap held to the motherboard on
the right hand side with a small philips screw. You can now remove the 
top half-shell and set it face down on a cloth or padded surface. 
     Unsolder the wires to the three keyswitches. They are plastic and
will melt if the soldering iron is held on them too long! So, desolder
quickly! The easiest way is to get under each connected wire and when the
solder melts, lift the wire -gently- with the iron. If it's wrapped too
tightly, you will need to unwrap it from the switch while the solder is
molten. All I can say is: work quickly and carefully. I use tweezers to 
move the wires while the solder is molten. You can cut the wires but may
not have enough to resolder them when it's time to reassemble the keyboard. 
There is no need to re-wrap them around the switch terminals when you 
solder them back on. "Tack" soldering is good enough... just let the wire
touch the switch terminal and solder the two together.
     Remove the 27 tiny philips screws and lift up the PC board. Notice
the tiny spring off to one side... don't lose it! It will fall out if you
turn the panel over. That spring provides a ground connection between the
metal frame of the keyboard and the PC board. It's there to discharge
static electricity safely and harmlessly to chassis ground. You will not
see any difference in normal operation without it, but leaving it out can
open the computer CIA chips to possible damage from static electricity. 
     Clean and replace parts as needed. The assembly is similar in design
to the C64, but parts are not interchangeable between the two. Additional
note: there are two versions of keyboards for the flat C128 but they look
identical, and the PC board has the same CBM part number: 310401-01.
The difference in the two versions is the length of the plungers under 
the keytops. In one version, green and white plungers are 3/8" long and 
in the other, blue and black plungers are 7/16". They are therefore not 
interchangeable. A longer plunger might fit and work as a replacement for 
a shorter one, but that keytop will stick up higher than all the others. 
Follow the previous instructions as far as parts replacement and cleaning.
Reassemble in reverse order of disassembly. The keyboard connector will
only go back one way. Be gentle. It's possible to bend pins over if you're
not careful. The power LED plug will fit and will work either way. Don't
forget the ground shield at the right side of the motherboard and don't
overtighten any of the screws. The plastic can't take much torque before
it strips out. 

DISASSEMBLY / REASSEMBLY... C128DCR COMPUTER KEYBOARD

     Unlike the keyboard in the C128, the 128DCR keyboard is inside of its 
own housing. It only requires the removal of six philips screws to get to 
the internals, but the screws are hidden beneath the rubber "feet" on the 
bottom of the keyboard. Those feet are held with double-sided tape and are 
easy to remove. I like to permanently remount them close to but not 
covering the access holes. That makes it easier the next time I need to 
open the case. Rather than "peel and stick" tape, I use Superglue to remount 
the rubber feet near the original spaces but not covering the screws again.
     As with the 128 keyboard, there are 27 tiny screws that hold the PC
board to the assembly. The interconnect cable is soldered to the board and
a plastic wire tie secures that cable to the board. The board can be opened
and cleaned without cutting that tie. Before you disassemble the keyboard,
it's a good idea to blow the dust and debris from the top. Lint and hair
may be trapped under the keys, so if there is a lot of it that doesn't
respond to blowing it out with an airhose, you may need to remove some of
the keytops to get at it. If you do that before you remove the board, the
plungers will not fall out when keytops & springs are removed. Wide keys
such as the ENTER key have a wire clip that is rather difficult to put 
back correctly. Note how it comes off, and work carefully so you don't
break the plastic retainers that hold the clip in place. If a keyboard is
really gunked up, I remove the key assembly from the PC board and spray 
Windex all over the keytops, then wipe them with a soft paintbrush. That 
will loosen most of the dirt and gunk under the keys. A flush with hot 
water washes away all the debris. I shake the assembly to eliminate most 
of the water and set the assembly aside to dry. A small fan blowing on 
the assembly will speed drying. After that, I then rub each pad with 
a sheet of paper (see above) to "polish" the contacts. 
     The keys are all part of an integrated metal and plastic subchassis, 
and if that main deck is damaged, it may not be repairable. However, most 
of the time failures are due to bad contacts, a broken plunger or a broken
keytop. The plastic subchassis is mounted over a "motherboard" where each 
plungers conductive pad touches the corresponding board contacts when a key 
is pressed. Don't use abrasives or rub on the conductive surfaces when
cleaning the PC board. Those contacts are just a carbon powder coating and 
are easily damaged. Use a mild cleaner such as Windex or rubbing alcohol 
on a cloth to clean up any spills on the board but -don't- rub hard. Wipe 
dust and debris off with a dry cloth or just use compressed air.
     The three keyswitches (Caps Lock, 40/80, & Shift Lock) wires connect 
to the board and must be unsoldered carefully (see instructions above). As 
with a C128 keyboard, all keypads wear out with use and then require 
increased pressure on the keys to make them work. If cleaning doesn't 
restore normal operation, replace the pad. If you don't have spares, swap 
the pad or the entire plunger with one from another key that isn't used as 
often. The pads just snap onto the bottom of the plunger but that requires 
removing the plunger from the subchassis. 
     Note that plungers and springs under the keytops are interchangeable 
with some C128 keyboards (there are two versions of flat 128 keyboard, each 
with a different length plunger). Although they look identical, C128DCR 
keytops have a longer shaft to fit their plungers, so not all C128 keytops 
will work. DCR keytops may therefore fit some C128 keyboards. My DCR keyboard 
is a Mitsumi and uses the longer keytops. 

THE SX KEYBOARD: 
     Because of the unique design of the SX-64 keyboard, I wrote a separate 
article for that computer hardware. Look in the SX directory for it.

Ray Carlsen CET
CARLSEN ELECTRONICS

If you have questions or comments, or more importantly if you spot any 
mistakes here, please let me know. Thanks!