                 REPAIRING THE SX POWER SUPPLY
             latest updates or corrections 1-29-2017

Here is one case history and follow-up that should help...

"I checked my non-working SX64 and the problem is the power supply
isn't working at all hence the SX64 appears dead. The fuse is not
blown and there is 117VAC on the inputs on the power supply PCB so the
ON/OFF switch is OK. The 9VAC is there (coming from the small
transformer T2 blue wires). The same transformer also outputs 15.4VAC
(on 2 red wires) and that goes to the 2 middle pins of bridge REC2
which outputs 18.65VDC on the 2 outer pins and goes into the 12V mini-
board. There's nothing coming out of the 12V mini-board and there's no
power going into the 5V mini-board. Q1 is not shorted (tested out of
circuit). The AC line input goes to the bridge REC1 and the output
measures 158VAC. I checked the transistors, diodes etc and nothing
appears to be shorted and no obvious blown-up damage. Also, it looks
like there is nothing going into or coming out of T1."

     It is apparent the switcher is not running. The absence of blown
fuses or burned parts tells me it is simply failing to start up for
some reason. A downstream overload would either blow fuses or make the
PS shut down. Note that it's never a good idea to run a switching
power supply without a load of at least 10 percent of it's maximum. To
safely run the SX PS disconnected from the computer boards, I use an
old automobile #1157 tail light as an artificial load. The heavy
filament goes across the +5VDC output (orange wires) and the smaller
filament goes to the +12VDC output (red wires). The black wires are
grounds. If you don't have anything to apply as a load and you just
want to check it quickly to see if it is working it can be run totally
unconnected for a short period of time. Connect the probes of a
digital multi-meter to the output connectors on the power supply
(black probe to black wire and red probe to red wire or red probe to
orange wire). Set the meter to DC Volts in the range 0-20 then power
on for 5 seconds. If the supply is working the DMM will show voltage.

     At this point, it would be helpful to know how the PS circuit
works when all is normal. The input of the bridge rectifier REC1
converts AC line voltage to DC, about 150VDC when unloaded (switcher
not running). To reduce that to the lower voltages needed by the
computer, a small transformer is "switched" on and off at a high
frequency 400 times a second (400Hz). This allows much smaller
components to be used at a high efficiency, unlike the old linear
power supplies. To provide the pulsed drive for the main switch
transistor Q1, the 12V sub-board oscillator IC1 is powered from line
transformer T2, rectified by REC2 and filtered to about +18VDC. Pulses
from IC1 feed transformer T3 which in turn drives transistor Q1. The
secondary of transformer T1 is the rectified and filtered +12VDC
source. Control feedback from the output side of this switching
circuit (R11) is sent back to IC1 to keep the 12V output constant.
This provides voltage regulation to compensate for line voltage and
load variations. The +5VDC source is derived from the +12VDC source.
It comes in at transistor Q3 and is switched by pulses from IC2 on the
5V sub board. Control feedback for the 5VDC source is sent from
resistor R20 back to IC2 to keep the +5VDC output constant. The
inductors L2 through L6 are simply filters to reduce noise on the DC
outputs. Note because of the high speed switching it is not possible
to measure the input or output on the transformers... it will usually
measure 0V or something less than 1V but will be moving slightly up
and down. A digital multi-meter is not fast enough to check it. The
only way the outputs of T1 or T3 can be checked is with an
oscilloscope. Transformers are fairly robust and usually don't fail so
generally the voltage at the transformer does not need to be checked.

     I have to admit at this point I don't have a lot of experience
repairing the SX power supply simply because it is so robust. For the
above failure (no fuses blown or burned parts), the most likely cause
of the failure is the old capacitors opening up inside... which is
exactly what happened with this one; the small electrolytic capacitors
on the sub boards were found to be out of specification when the ESR
was measured. All switch-mode power supplies are critical of their
capacitors and only good quality caps should be used to replace them.
In this particular case the small 10uf and 4.7uf capacitors are used
to start-up the IC's on the sub boards so they must be good. IC1
(MB3759) is used to drive transformer T3 and thus transistor Q1 so it
is a critical part in the operation of the SX power supply. The
obsolete MB3759 IC can be replaced with a TL494 if it's bad. This IC
frequently fails if the capacitors that are connected to it go bad,
and that is what happened in this case. Apparently Fujitsu IC's are
known to be frequent failure items in other hardware too, especially
74-series TTL ICs. The tiny sub boards will have to be de-soldered
from the main board to work on them. If IC1 is changed, add a socket so
if it fails again in a few years it can easily be swapped for a good
part without having to remove the sub board. One word of caution: If
the switcher is not working, the main input filter cap C7 could hold a
charge for a while after power off. The best way to check capacitors
is something called an ESR meter. If one is not available, it's best to 
just change the caps because they will be 30+ years old anyway. While 
you have the PS apart, check the solder connections on the power 
transistors and diodes. I've found a few that had broken loose and 
caused intermittent operation.

     120V and 230V SX power supplies are very similar but use
different power transformers and transistors. The best way to run one
on the alternate line or mains voltage is with a step-up or step-down
transformer. Voltage converters come in various types and some cheaper
converters used to run small toys are not recommended to run a
switching PS. Be sure to use a converter that has an equivalent or
higher rated wattage output. The best have what is called a "pure sine
wave output".

SWITCHER BASICS:
     I can simplify it down to a very basic idea. You flip a switch and
the light goes on (assuming an old incandescent bulb). The lamp gets
full voltage... full power to me more precise. How about if you start
flipping the switch on and off, and each "cycle" is exactly half and
half. That represents a 50:50 duty cycle and the lamp gets full voltage
each time but only half the power it did at full on. If you can vary the
timing (which is what old light dimmers did), you have the basis of a
switching power supply. Take a sample of the output and feed it back to
control the timing of the on-pulses and you regulate the output.
     Any switching power supply can self destruct and burn up. It's
quite rare to find one that damages the equipment it feeds, but it can
happen. Newer switchers have built in over-voltage and short circuit
protection. Some can run unloaded. The older PC supplies would blow if
-not- loaded, so I'm super cautious about telling a user it's OK to do
that with any PS. 

Ray Carlsen


