
                  CBM 1541-II - DIAGNOSTICS AND REPAIR        
                 latest updates and corrections 2-8-20 

     The 1541-II is a cost reduced version of the earlier 1541 disk drive, 
but is identical in its basic functions although the red power LED and 
green activity LED are exactly the opposite of the LEDs in the 1541, which
used green power and red activity LEDs. This drive uses single sided double 
density disks. High density disks will NOT work. The motherboards (Assy no. 
340503) used in the two versions of the drives I own appear to be nearly 
identical. For the most part, the chips used, board layout, and chip ID 
numbers match each other. The design is what Commodore called "cost reduced" 
because it uses fewer more integrated (and some proprietary) ICs. A reduced 
chip count simplifies troubleshooting but also makes finding some replacement 
chips difficult. Fortunately, some of the chips are interchangeble with 
earlier 1541 models. Exceptions are as follows:
     The R/W head amplifier chip is a surface mount device (SMD), and the 
only other Commodore product I know of that uses that IC is a C128DCR (metal 
case USA version). The DOS ROM code is in one 16K chip as in the 1541C, 
unlike the earlier 1541 with two 8K DOS ROMs. The 1541-II uses a 251968-03 
in a 27128 equivalent ROM, likely the only socketed chip unless the drive 
has been repaired before. The only other proprietary IC is a motor control 
device number 251828-03 (rev 4 board has a -01). That IC replaces many 
individual TTL (logic) chips, and so far, I've never seen a bad one.
     Like the 1571 and 1581, this drive has device select switches on the 
rear of the case. That allows the user to easily change the device number 
without opening the drive. The two tiny paddle switches are configured as 
follows (leftmost switch is #1 and right switch is #2): Both up = device 8 
(the default for all drives), #1 down & #2 up = device 9, #1 up & #2 down = 
device 10, both down = device 11. Never use a pencil point to press those 
paddles. The lead may break off in the drive and short something out. 
      Like the 1541, the 1541-II uses two power supply sources: +5VDC for the 
electronics and +12VDC for the motors. However, the 1541-II power supply is 
external to the drive. That keeps heat buildup inside the drive to a minimum, 
but some of those external "bricks" suffered early failures. 
     These same power packs are also used for the 1581 drive and there are 
apparently two different versions. The first one is a smaller unit that 
supplies +5 volts DC at 700mA (0.7 Amps) and +12 volts DC at 0.5 Amps. The 
larger power pack is rated at 1 Amp for the 5 volt source. Apparently the 
earlier design was marginal to begin with and suffered premature failures. 
     Both early and late design power packs are potted with epoxy and are 
considered unrepairable. However, I was able to peel the bottom cover off 
one of the smaller units (it was intermittant) and repair it by resoldering 
all the connections on the internal PC board. The complaints I've heard when 
a supply starts failing is that it works when cold but causes disk errors, 
failure to read, and drive lockup after warmup. Suspect a bad supply if the 
drive LEDs don't light at all. 

                         THE DRIVE MECHANISM

     I've seen two different 1541-II mechanisms: Mitsumi (actually a 
Newtronics chassis) and Chinon. They both are simple in design and equally 
robust, and they appear to be interchangeable. The Mitsumi reminds me of a 
1571 mechanism but the single fixed head in this drive of course eliminates 
one of the weak points of the 1571, namely the flimsy top head mount. It 
shares one other failure point however... the door latch pin that works 
loose and falls out. When that happens, the door latch doesn't work and the 
lever just flaps loosely back and forth. If the pin is heard rattling around 
inside the drive (hopefully it hasn't shorted anything out), it can be 
reinserted in the door latch and secured with a dab of superglue. The Mitsumi 
mechanism has a spindle drive belt like earlier 1541 types and has a motor 
speed control on the drive PC board. The Chinon mechanism has a direct drive 
spindle motor (no belt) and the speed is not adjustable.
     Maintenance for any drive should begin with cleaning of the head (use
alcohol or other solvent on a cotton swab) and stepper rails if they appear 
to be sticky. Before any other maintenance, if there is a buildup of dust 
inside the drive, blow it out with compressed air. Pay attention to the IR 
sensor near the front left side of the drive. That sensor signals the drive 
that a disk has been changed, and if clogged with dust, it may not report a 
disk change. That could corrupt the next disk inserted and written to in the 
drive. 
     The head gap is so tiny, you may not be able to see the residue that 
keeps your drive from reading disks reliably. It's best to just clean it 
every few months if the drive is used regularly and more often if your disks 
have seen a lot of use. It is not dirt that contaminates a head but the oxide 
from worn disks. Make sure the felt pressure pad is intact on the upper 
spring loaded plate. If missing, you can replace it with a pad from an old 
audio cassette that has been trimmed to fit. Glue it with contact cement. 
     The stepper rails are the two metal bars that the head assembly slides 
back and forth on. Swab the rails with solvent and, either run them dry or 
apply a very light coat of sewing machine oil. Don't use any kind of spray 
lube inside the drive. Spray instead on a cotton swab, then apply to the 
rails. Plain oil tends to collect dust and gets sticky over time. A very 
light application of silicone spray on a Q-tip applied to the rails would 
work better and last longer than any kind of grease or oil. 
     Suspect a drive alignment problem -only-if the drive can't load known 
good programs (commercial disks) but it works fine with it's own recently 
formatted disks. A slightly misaligned drive will chatter when loading 
programs as it encounters disk read errors, and it will fail to load if 
severely misaligned. Note that some commercial programs have intentional 
errors (copy protection) on the disk(s) that will make a normal drive 
chatter and flash the green LED while loading. I should state that I've 
never encountered a misaligned 1541-II. 
     The 1541-II drive doesn't suffer from the heat related alignment 
problems that the earlier 1541 does, but it can be "sluggish" and look like 
it's out of alignment. That's usually caused by sticky head rails. Any 1541 
drive can become sluggish if it sits for a long time without being used. 
The head assembly should slide back and forth easily (drive turned off, of 
course). If rails are sticky, the head has trouble finding the correct 
track quickly enough and you end up with intermittant read errors, 
especially when the drive is cold and seeks are at the outer tracks. 
     If your computer setup or components have been moved recently, take 
note: disk drive and serial cables too close to a TV or monitor can 
sometimes pick up interference from the flyback transformer in the display 
and garble the data. Move the drive and cables at least a foot away from 
the monitor and try it again. If that helps, move the drive to the other 
side of the monitor and route the cables away from the source of the
interference. 

IMPORTANT NOTICE: 
     If you remove the mechanism from the drive (four screws and the door 
latch knob), mark the connectors so you will be sure to put them back 
correctly. Pin 1 is indicated on the board for each one. If accidently 
reversed, you can do serious damage to the drive board or mechanism. Even 
though the black head connector is "keyed", if connected incorrectly, the 
hard-to-get R/W head amplifier chip will be destroyed!!! 
     The easiest way to remove the plastic door knob without breaking it 
is to push on the front cover against the backside of the knob. It will 
slide off easily that way. 

             CHIPS FAILURES AND POSSIBLE SYMPTOMS

U1	74LS08		LOGIC
     No reset when drive powered up or from computer.
 
U2	74LS42		LOGIC

U3	6502		MICROPROCESSOR
     Spindle runs continuously with green LED on.

U4	251968-03 	DOS ROM, (reads as 27128 EPROM)
     Spindle motor runs continuously and green LED stays on or blinks. 

U5	LC-3517A	SRAM (generic 6116 2K SRAM)
     When drive powered up, motor runs continuously and green LED flashes 
slowly (about 1 flash every 2 seconds). 

U6	6522		VIA
     Drive does not respond to commands from computer or "Searching for..." 
but no further response from drive.

U7	7406		LOGIC
     No drive reset from computer or "Searching for..." but no further 
response from drive. 

U8	6522		VIA
     Spindle motor doesn't turn.

U9	74LS04		LOGIC
     No write protect sense.

U10	251828-03	MOTOR CONTROLLER
     Spindle motor doesn't turn, or write protect not working, or stepper 
doesn't move, can cause continuous spindle and activity LED on.

U11	74LS86		LOGIC
     Drive does not respond to commands from computer.

U12	CX20185		R/W HEAD AMPLIFIER (Surface mount IC)
     alt: Sanyo LA8200M  No read and/or write. Check for clogged drive 
head first! 

U13	uPA2003C	LOGIC, CMOS, 7 GATE DRIVER, 
     Spindle motor doesn't turn (or runs constantly) and/or stepper 
doesn't move.

U14	74LS14		LOGIC
     No drive reset from computer.

Power supply: Drive may work when system is cold but fails to read after 
warmup, or spindle will run continuously but the LEDs will be dim or will 
not light at all. Smaller power "brick" (700mA) is a common failure item. 

                  DIAGNOSTICS... WHAT TO LOOK FOR

     When you are troubleshooting a drive, it is important to know how it 
works normally, and to observe it closely (with the cover off) for symptoms. 
For example, note how the drive motors and indicator LED's function when 
the drive is powered up, reset, and accessed by the computer. When the 
drive is instructed to LOAD a program, note whether the stepper moves, how 
much it moves, and if it "chatters". Try various functions like Initialize 
and Format, and observe the results. Sometimes the clues to a malfunction 
are subtle and different chips can cause the same apparent symptoms. Such 
things as a bad serial cable can be swapped out, but if another cable is 
not available, an ohmmeter check from one end to the other should show all 
pins connected. It's a "straight-through" cable: pin 1 to pin 1, 2 to 2, 
etc. with no shorts between adjacent pins. 
     If your drive suddenly goes "dead" and you can't read disks without 
"FILE NOT FOUND" errors, try the Initialize command:
OPEN15,8,15:PRINT#15,"I0":CLOSE15 (assuming drive is set as device 8). 
This (or formatting a disk) will return the heads to track zero and may
bring it "back to life". The problem is a quirk in the operating system. 
If the drive encounters certain errors while running a program, or if the 
drive is turned off before a program is properly closed, the drive head 
may get "stuck" past the directory track. A computer reset or turning the 
drive off and back on again will not reset that condition, but an 
Initialize or disk format will return the heads and restore normal 
operation. As an alternative, if this happens and you have a program in 
memory that you don't want to lose, take the top off the drive and push 
the head back gently with your fingers. 
     To properly diagnose a potential problem, you have to know exactly 
how the drive should respond when it's working correctly.
 DRIVE POWER UP: Red power LED comes on and stays on, green activity LED 
comes on (and spindle motor turns) for about two seconds, then green LED 
should go out and motor should stop.
 COMPUTER POWER UP (OR RESET): Green LED should come on and go out, and 
spindle motor should start and stop within two seconds. 
 READ DIRECTORY: Insert a known good disk and type: LOAD"$",8 and hit the 
RETURN key. The disk should spin and the head should move forward to track 
18 and read the directory. The screen will show: SEARCHING FOR $. If it 
finds it, the screen will say READY within a few seconds (time delay 
determined by size of directory). If the disk read fails for any reason 
(drive door open, unformatted disk, bad chips in the drive, etc.), the 
green LED will flash and an error message: FILE NOT FOUND will appear. If 
you read the disk error channel, it will say: 74, DRIVE NOT READY,00,00. 
Note that you must "clear" the error by reading the error channel or 
resetting the drive, or subsequent read attempts will also fail. 
 INITIALIZE: This command from the computer should move the head from 
wherever it was to track 18 (directory) and the disk should spin. The head 
will not move (but the spindle motor will turn) if it is already over track 
18. If there is no disk in the drive, or you insert an unformatted disk, or 
if the drive door is open, it should cause the spindle motor to run and the 
head to seek track 18 (directory) anyway. When it tries and fails, it will 
pull the head back to track zero and "chatter" as it hits the head stop, 
then advance to where track 18 should be. The green LED will flash because 
of the drive read error. No error message will be shown on the screen, but 
if you read the disk error channel, it will say: 21,READ ERROR,18,00.
 FORMAT OR DISK "NEW": When you format a disk, the spindle motor will turn 
and the green LED will come on. The drive will pull the head back to track 
zero and "chatter", then the stepper will advance to each track as it writes 
from track 1 to track 35. When it finishes the format (about 1 minute 25 
seconds on a stock drive), the head will return to track 18 (directory). 
If the format fails, the green LED will flash, but there will be no error 
message on the screen. If you read the drive error channel, it will say: 
21,READ ERROR,00,00. Format failures can be caused by write protect, drive 
door open, bad disk, bad or clogged head, or bad chips in the drive. The 
format will attempt to write to track 1, then do a read, and if that read 
fails, the format will terminate, and the head will not move from track 1. 
If it advances a few tracks and stops, suspect a bad disk, an intermittant 
connection to the head or a faulty IC on the board. Swap out the drive 
mechanics to check the head. It may test good with an ohmmeter (not open 
circuit), but if defective, may still fail to format a disk. For write 
protect problems, check the sensor to see if dust or perhaps a loose write 
protect tab from an old disk is blocking it. 
     As mentioned above, it is sometimes helpful to read the disk drive 
error channel when the green activity LED is flashing. Here is a small 
BASIC program to do that. It reads the channel, displays the error message, 
and turns the flashing LED off. All of the possible drive error messages 
are listed in the back of the operators manual. 
 10 OPEN 15,8,15 
 20 INPUT#15,EN,EM$,ET,ES 
 30 PRINT EN,EM$,ET,ES 
 40 CLOSE 15


Ray Carlsen CET
Carlsen Electronics... a leader in trailing-edge technology.
