                 THE COMPUTER SAVER - SOLID STATE VERSION
 A PROTECTION DEVICE FOR THE COMMODORE 64, LATE VERSION VIC20 & PLUS/4
             Latest updates and/or corrections 4-25-2014

     I have designed an all solid state version of the Saver. This one  
doesn't have a relay but uses two power transistors as switches. The 
circuit can be installed inside a computer, wired directly onto a short 
length of cable with DIN connectors on each end (no case needed) or 
installed inside a plastic case with the appropriate DIN cables attached. 
Like the earlier Saver, these last two models are "stand alone" devices 
and as such can be used with any C64 and its compatable power supply. The 
cable-only version has a single "failsafe" status LED that lights up if 
the Saver trips due to over-voltage from the power supply but it doesn't 
have the 9VAC indicator (green LED). That LED circuit can be added if 
desired.
     Several parameters needed to be considered to implement an all solid 
state Saver: 1. Using a transistor or other solid state device as a switch 
means there will always be a slight voltage loss across the device at the 
required current draw of the load, unlike a relay that switches the voltage 
with no loss across its contacts. A C64 computer with cartridge plugged in 
draws about 1 Amp and the voltage drop across this Saver is less than 150 
millivolts (0.15V) which is negligible to normal operation of the computer. 
2. The power used by the Saver circuit itself should be minimal compared to 
the load the computer represents. This design draws about the same as the 
relay Saver, approximately 50mA. The original CBM "brick" has a current 
capacity of 1.5 Amps, so this added load is acceptable. 3. When the Saver 
detects an excessive voltage rise from the power supply, it must switch the 
power off quickly and completely. It would not be effective if it only 
reduced the voltage by "regulating" it down since the Saver would then 
dissipate a lot of heat. 4. Lastly, after the device has tripped, it must 
not overheat or otherwise itself fail from the over-voltage (which could 
go as high as eleven volts DC), even if left that way indefinitely.  
     This Saver uses standard components. The switch transistors are PNP 
silicons in a TO220 case, TIP32. Two are used in parallel to lower the 
overall loss across them. The sense and the driver are 2N2222 but can be 
any small signal type. The 4.7V zener diode is part of a voltage divider 
with a trip point of 5.4 volts. If you are building your own Saver, it will 
probably be necessary to "trim" the divider by adding a higher value 
resistor across one of the two resistors to set the trip point at exactly 
5.4 VDC. This requires an accurate voltmeter and variable power supply. I 
offer an assembled and tested module for installation in a computer, and a 
cable version with module installed and connectors on the ends. 

Ray