
      WHAT TO DO ABOUT THAT SQUARE POWER PLUG ON THE PLUS/4 
            Latest updates and corrections  02-22-99

     The Plus/4 square power connector is not available anywhere, so if 
you don't already have the power pack that came with the computer, you 
only have a few options to make your computer work. 1. fabricate a 
connector yourself by poking some wires into the computer and soldering 
to them, 2. modify an existing connector so it will fit the Plus/4 socket, 
and 3. change the socket on the computer so it can use a standard C64 
power supply. I have considered these alternatives and will give you the 
information I have for each. Let me say now that if you value that 
computer, you should be using a better supply than the old C64 black 
"brick". 'Nuff said about that.
     1. The quickest way to get "up and running" is cut the plug off a 
C64 power pack and attach some heavy buss wire to the four wires so they 
will fit the Plus/4 socket. You need to know which wires go to which pins. 
Commodore didn't make the job easy. I have several CBM power packs and 
each has different colored wires inside the power cable. To determine 
which is which, you will need a volt-ohmmeter to test the power pack. 
Since there are only four wires, it's not too difficult. First, with an 
ohm-meter (and the power supply unplugged from the wall outlet!), find 
the two wires that show a low resistance (less than 10 ohms). Note the 
color(s) of those wires. Those are the two wires for the 9VAC output. 
They go to the two upper terminals of the computer socket (seen facing 
the rear of the computer). Next, with a voltmeter and the power pack
connected to the wall outlet, measure the 5 volts DC output. Be careful 
not to short any of the pins together when the supply is running! The 
plus or positive meter lead (usually red) will go to the positive 5 volt 
wire of the supply, and the negative meter lead (usually black) will go 
to the negative of the 5 volt supply. The polarity is correct if the 
meter pointer deflects upward (or in the case of a digital meter, it will
indicate positive voltage). If the meter deflects backwards (or the 
digital meter shows negative voltage), reverse the leads to the meter. 
Now you know the polarity of the 5 volts DC output of the supply. Those 
two wires will be different colors. Write down the information for 
reference. Again, facing the rear of the Plus/4 computer, the +5VDC
(positive lead) of the supply goes to the bottom left terminal of the 
socket, and the - (negative lead) of the supply goes to the bottom right 
terminal. By the way, if the power supply measures over +5 volts DC, 
don't use it. That would indicate the regulator IC in it is failing. It 
would damage the computer.
     2. There are two types of existing DIN connectors that can be 
modified to fabricate a working plug for the Plus/4. Actually, that 
computer was made with one of two types: the four pin square beast that 
is not available anywhere, and the same seven pin DIN that Commodore 
also used for the C64. The power packs are identical for both. Note that
although the computer power socket has seven pins, only four of them are 
actually used. Most power packs only have four pins installed in the plug. 
The users manual for my Plus/4 shows the seven pin DIN, but my computer 
is the square four pin type. With a bit of experimentation, I found that 
the pin spacing for the two types is identical if several of the pins are 
cut off the 7 pin, leaving four pins. The following diagram shows what I
mean:

    O         O           O         O          O        O

  O             O       X            X  

    O         O           O         O          O        O
         O                     X

   C64 PS PLUG       X INDICATES PINS CUT     PLUS/4 SOCKET

That doesn't mean you can just take a C64 supply and cut some pins off 
and make it work. The pinout for the Plus/4 is slightly different. Here 
are the pinouts for the C64 and the Plus/4 for comparison:

 9VAC ---7           6--- 9VAC   9VAC--- 3         4 ---9VAC

        3             1             

+5VDC ---5           4          +5VDC ---1         2 ---GROUND
     GROUND ---2                                       

        C64 POWER SOCKET             PLUS/4 POWER SOCKET

Notice the pinout is offset by one pin. Another obvious problem is that 
the 4 pin connector is square. Fitting a round one to the Plus/4 requires 
cutting the front half of the outer shield off. This exposes the pins, so 
you must be careful not to allow them to short if the connector is not 
plugged into the computer but the supply is connected to the AC outlet. 
Without some kind of shell on the modified plug, it's possible to connect 
it incorrectly since there is now no keyway to prevent it.

     3. Probably the best way to fix the problem of the four pin square 
DIN connector on the Plus/4 is to replace it with a standard 7 pin DIN, as 
is used on the C64. Then, a standard C64 supply will plug right in. Since 
some versions of the Plus/4 already have the 7 pin DIN socket, I examined 
my four pin version and discovered that the board will accept either type 
of connector with no modifications. 
     If you can find an old dead C64 motherboard, you can rob the power 
connector from it. If not, those 7 pin DIN right angle sockets are still 
available from several sources. One is: http://www.digikey.com. There are 
several Digikey part numbers (because of different vendors) that you can 
use to order the 7 pin DIN 270 degree sockets:  CP-2370ND, 275-1021-ND, 
CP-7070ND, and 275-1026-ND. Each costs about US $1.50. Changing the socket 
requires removing the Plus/4 motherboard from the case and removing the 
bottom shield (unsoldering). It's similar to the C64 in the way it is put 
together. 

Ray Carlsen CET
Carlsen Electronics