              THE SX KEYBOARD: DISASSEMBLY AND CLEANING
               latest updates and corrections 2-17-2017

     This keyboard is completely different than previous CBM designs. 
You need to know how this one works to be able to safely take it apart 
for cleaning. The main keyboard component is a conductive rubber bladder 
separated from the PC board underneath by a white or grey plastic sheet 
with holes in it. The plastic sheet is an insulator. Until a key is 
pressed, the insulator holds the bladder away from the PC board contact 
points. A tiny spring inside the bottom of each key touches the bladder 
and presses it onto the PC board contact. If the insulator gets damaged 
or distorted, some keys will not work or may make contact all the time! 
     The keyboard comes apart for rework by using your fingernails 
or a coin to pry on the sides of the keyboard just to the left of the 
left arrow key and to the right of the F1 key between the top and 
bottom half-shells. The rear of the top cover will pop loose and you 
can pull the top up and off. The internal keyboard is then visible as 
several rows of keys over a black conductive rubber bladder, which in 
turn is mounted over a PC board. 

SIMPLE RESTORATION OF NON-FNCTIONING KEYS

     Before you decide to pull the bladder for cleaning, if only a few
keys are not working properly, it may be that the springs under those 
keys are weak from use. (see photos) If that's the case, individual key 
functions may be restored by extracting each key, removing the tiny 
spring and stretching it -slightly- to provide more pressure on the 
bladder when the key is pressed. It is important to inspect the spring 
afterwards to see if it sticks out from the key bottom. If it does, 
that key might make contact all the time or it will be too sensitive 
and make contact when you don't expect it! The correct position of the 
spring is: level with the plastic when the key is not pressed. 
     Each key plunger can be removed for cleaning if one or more are 
sticky from a liquid spill. They would -all- have to be removed to 
gain access to the PC board under the bladder. None of the keyboard 
parts are interchangeable with a C64. Note that the shift-lock key is 
not a latching switch as in a C64 or C128, but a momentary contact 
pushbutton like all the rest. A circuit in the SX forms the "latching" 
device and an LED on that keyboard key comes on when ShiftLock is on. 
     To remove individual keys, use your fingernails to squeeze the 
two tabs of each key on the underside of the board assembly while 
pushing them forward. The key assembly will pop out. Don't lose the 
tiny spring inside the bottom of the key. If you drop one on the floor, 
you may never find it, so be careful! I have "lost" a few springs.  
I use a large magnet on a string to search and retrieve one's I've 
dropped. It's helpful to arrange all removed keys, in order, on your 
tabletop. If they get mixed up, you can use a C64 keyboard for a
visual reference. (It's better to remove them one at a time.) I put a 
white towel down on the table so the keys do not move when set down. 
Springs will be more visible too. 
     If a key top spring is too short (recessed from fatigue), that key 
will not work. If the spring is too long (stretched and protruding from 
the key), that key will make contact all the time (repeats on the 
screen) or other keys will not work! Adjusting those springs under the 
non-functioning keys is the first thing you should try before taking the 
keyboard apart further. If any keys don't respond correctly, pop that 
key out and re-tension the spring as necessary. LOAD "KEYBOARD TEST",8 
and RUN for a graphics display of the keyboard. This program provides 
visual and audible feedback. When all keys respond correctly, reassemble 
the case. 
     If a keyboard test program is not handy, I prefer to boot the 
computer and just tap each key lightly several times. I write down the 
ones that don't respond properly so I can attend to them later. Most of 
the keys will show some character on the screen. A few that don't such 
as the F keys do affect the blinking cursor, so those can be checked as 
well. Ones like the C=, CTRL and SHIFT keys affect the operation of the 
other keys when they are held down. 

IF THE KEYBOARD ACTUALLY NEEDS INTERNAL CLEANING

     The PC board assembly is held in place with four screws. The 
fifth screw on the bladder is a connection point to ground the bladder
to the circuit board underneath. That screw only has to be removed if 
you intend to remove the bladder. Remove the connector at the rear of 
the case (two screws) and the PC board assembly can then be lifted out 
of the case bottom. 
     Assuming there was a liquid spill, or re-tensioning the springs 
did not help, removing the bladder from the PC board requires great 
care. The insulator tends to stick to the board near each contact point. 
If pulled away quickly, it will most certainly be torn. I use a dental 
pick to slowly nudge the tiny areas that stick as I gently pull the 
bladder off the board. The last one took me about 10 minutes to remove. 
That work cannot be rushed! Some areas of the elastic insulator deform 
as they pull loose and must be pushed back into place before reassembly. 
If you don't -have- to pull the bladder from the keyboard, don't do it!
     Another area that might prove problematic is the connection points 
between the bladder and the PC board. There are half a dozen painted 
"lines" of conductive material under a strip of metal (which must be
removed, two screws) before the bladder can be lifted off the board. 
Those contact points may require rework of some kind to make contact 
again when the bladder is put back. If any connections are broken, the 
reassembled keyboard may have many keys that don't work! To ensure the 
conductive lines will make good contact, I routinely re-surface the 
lines using an automobile window defogger repair kit, which has a 
conductive "paint". I use a toothpick to apply the liquid along the 
damaged lines on the PC board. The liquid must be allowed to dry 
completely (at least an hour) before the bladder is put back. 
     If you must clean the bladder, never use anything abrasive. The 
black "dots" are the contacts. They are just a thin conductive coating 
on plastic, so rough treatment can easily destroy the bladder beyond 
repair. A -light- rub with a dry Q-tip is all that is needed on each 
black spot... if necessary. For the copper PC board contacts, I use a 
#2 pencil eraser to remove oxidation from each contact point, then I 
rub each with a dry Q-tip or cloth to "polish" the surface. The 
resulting contacts should be shiny with no spots or blemishes. I don't 
use solvents unless the board and/or bladder is contaminated because 
of a liquid spill. Sugary drinks like soda pop or coffee can be 
cleaned with Isopropyl (rubbing alcohol) and dried, then the board 
should be polished as indicated above. Isopropyl alcohol can leave a 
white powder residue that must be cleaned off. 

Ray Carlsen CET	
CARLSEN ELECTRONICS
